
# Last Exit to Victoria

(5mins. of Murder Alone with **Wigger** and "Bloodland")

 

Lawrence Ytzhak Braithwaite


 

 

 

## 1

\...as a child I was told that not knowing the alphabet will cause
illiteracy. It\'ll send you into a drugged out gangland life of white
trash nightmares and corner boy peddling to homosexuals, who are
professional players, obsessed with age and are willing to drag it and
you into emptiness. That in knowing the letters, Ill know that they
assemble to construct various images that become words. Words are the
narrative transformation of the images. Printing a page of unbroken
words is like a fresh tattoo. It captures a moment/place, sentiment
and period. It orchestrates the body in motion as it flexes to move a
pen/strike at a key/form a fist/lift a drink or move to a rhythm. The
words become the unspoken intertextuality of ethnic, racial and
cultural metaphoric speech. The metre of casual dialogue = a
rhythm/noise/visual/bass, a soundtrack to a post-literate train of
thought.

I dedicated **Wigger** to the sound of Slayer and Sonic
Youth---\"Bloodland\" to Cannibal Corpse (George \"Corpsegrinder\"
Fisher) = I dedicated them to sound. Slayer is for the fury and speed
and violence that the book has. Deathmetal is the living desire of the
neo-redneck burnout. It\'s all going after the sport of
brutality---the art of hurting someone. The walking jokes, with
targets on their backs, placed there by lilbitches, taking them for Mn
Ms. The only violence is, the way the words appear on the page, marked
by the slashes that connote rhythm of speech and interrupted thought.
They are like semi-colons = / the // are colons and so are the =
signs. Sometimes the - move out to separate speech---someone takes
lead//does a solo. Sonic Youth\'s sounds appear in the form of the
book dissolving. Deathmetal is just dealing with the situation. The
book and the story, like the characters, are trying to hold themselves
together. Brian and Jerehmia symbolize this the most. They talk. No
one listens.

\...a printer ejects swatches of stolen tissue that collects the sound
and images of what is considered low brow art and skill//

Hardcore (H.C.)/Country/Rockabilly

Thrash and Speedmetal/Rap/Deathmetal/Blackmetal

Cinema/Television and;

Comics Books

Brian appears to be rambling but he makes the most sense because he
speaks through metaphor and his heart, like Black speech and
song---the negro spiritual, seeming to sing about a river,

when it is a code,

for an escape,

at a certain time,

from the plantation.

Gangsta rap seems to boast

about an evening

or event

but is just shouting

validity,

existence and

enterprise.

Brians grasp on reality becomes inconsequential.

Jerehmias story is dumbshow.

Brian surrenders his ideals and his soul, by killing Spook (the Black
hustler friend).

Jerehmia is just having his taken and he\'s telling you about it---but
I knew people in Atlanta that didn\'t want to hear about any of that
or them. I knew a boy from Tennessee hurting worst than what was going
as oppression under those 100 dollar Afro centric hats.

\...Wordcore, Jamaican dub poetry, Rap and Rock Steady are disposed to
the Homeric boasts and catalogues of post-modern thugs/hoodlums and
desperadoes w/ the hope of kindness and compassion.

In donning the Black persona, symbolized through the silver jacket,
Brian finally does what everyone has been attempting to do throughout
the book. Brian is killed---his soul is killed, through the burden of
the weight of the Black youth---the Black persona, the persona of
deglamoured oppression. He has achieved the goal of being Black but he
is unprepared to handle something that the Blacks are raised to deal
with through centuries of struggle---youd suppose.

I met a boy with crystal smack grey eyes, who was offering to suck the
fender (for \$5) off an urban assault vehicle for a painkiller.

If you listen and see the page, you\'ll see a tattoo and note well,
that some words are//

-Rhythm

-Lead and

-Bass

Jerehmia, he has no desire to be Black. He knows what the shit is and
he\'s got his own. He just watches the seemingly liberal Perry go
catch back the Black boy trying to bail on the whole scene. He just
knows that nothing that\'s happening, is about him or the niglet.
It\'s about the little men with big shirts and the chicks in bed or
sitting off from the Bar b q..

\...strange how all the youngmen holding up walls waiting on passers
by had deep drawls, no smiles and trailers in their hearts.

The book and the story are collapsing. The spaces and sparsness of the
narrative is there to get you to listen carefully and read again and
close read and not take things at face value. People say more,
especially, when they\'ve had a lifetime of hurt, through very few
words and the words look in ways that they feel---speeching in
accapella. The words sound the way they feel. The book shows patterns
of speech.

Mcluhan would argue the global village: technology is good---the book
people are lacking in the rich grammar of the TV = This is referred to
today as the post-literate generation---John Cages bastard children
turn to violence and the acoustic space of video and computer games
and the delicacy of words typed over television screens.

Mcluhan would argue\...

\...the acoustic

 

 

 

## 2

 

The Comic book uses frames and juxtaposition to connect the
disconnectedness of thought and words, be it through the gruff
noireness of Frank Miller, Dave Sim or Martin Wales \"Kinder Nacht,\"
or the smooth lines, colours and ruff justice of Todd McFarlane. They
collect the street sounds and activities the way Rap culture
manipulates and emulates, via spin art and samples, the ready made
terror of interurban life. To frame is to make perfect the moment of
the fingers striking the keys, which can be the repetition of words
and phrases = outlets ripping and shredding, w/ the knowledge that
framing is certainly an attempt to make perfect, to make the words as
enticing and elegant as the bovine euphony of a fascist\'s goose step.

Brian is condemned to sit, numbed out on pills, in a room, filled with
drag queens, watching them transform. Just like Brian\'s desire, and
the other characters desires, to be Black, the drag queens attempt to
be women, without knowing, that beyond the glamour, is a lot of
hardship and struggle. Drag queens die, as well, when they finally
achieve their dream of being a woman. It\'s not as much fun or better
than they thought it would be. They are unprepared for the daily
struggle and threats. You can see this on the page. They are boxed in,
allowing themselves to be, finally, separated from the freeness and
flow of the book. They must stay within the parameters. The glamour is
gone. They have to bear the actual pain. Brian has got the auditory
recollection of rape in his head. Brian is numb. Sos Jerehmia, but
he\'s numb from the beginning, any way. Hes just recollecting,
now---no need to figure. He cant hold it together, nor does he want
to. His flag is upside down, Oswalds dead---nothings right. You
separate the body from the mind and its all good.

\...a word can be the hums or bops in the background as when a funk
musician beats the strings w/ his thumb---the buzz and scratch of a
tat gun on a steadied arm or back---the stilled breath and firm muscle
of a word or image engraved on a belly. It gets tied into the
paragraph. Some words take on the repetitive ecstatic riff of ska or
reggae or the decay of the crash/noise of H.C. or metal. They recline
on the page or in the air as if they were all going to amount to a
junkies last sigh. Instead, they collapse into the lost, disorientated
and somewhat satisfied image of Orsen Wells after thrashing a room at
Xanadu.

\...and the book and story crumble into a final sustained note, done
through a note to Andrew from Jerry. \"Bloodland\" has a crack of gun
shot and shit and a heart beat. As it began on a note---it ends. His
(Jerrys) speech is proper and distant from the language of the book.
He has become a literary character of the Modernist sense.

Jerking the Modernist approach to distance, into \"groovy times," is
the dumbshow to the contemporary adoration of the absurdist tragic
comedy = anti-romantic. It presents itself, today, through the jaded
situationism of talkshow culture. The sort that \"Blast\" and
\"Counter Blast\" utilized through the headlines and print of
newspapers. The newspapers place horror and glory side by side in a
folio that has a calculated randomness. It will always assemble to
state 1 thing = these events happen. It is only through such genres of
media (music/comic/print/television), that we can see that each has a
thing in common/coupons and advertising = rhetoric and metaphor. If
the passage of a text takes on the sound and image of the
disjointedneness of casual speech and media, then the results are not
only the coded tales being woven, but the presentation of the
brutality that leads to the violent outcome.

Jerehmia, he just figures\...hes just feedback from a bass, right now.

**Wigger** and \"Bloodland\" are what the printer jetted out---a
conceptual pastiche alphabet from the corner or gutter. It assembles
the images in sequence which persuades the narrative to be pulled out
from under a character. Its what got them blocked off---formatted,
layed out, then pile-drived with carefully selected skin grafts of
onomatopoeias. The words takes Audens diver, diving w/ his brilliant
bow and takes it beyond the enthralled spectator. They suppose that he
has forgotten to test the water and has come out a dumb struck
paraplegic = what just happened/where are our people/who are our
people/do we have any people: NO. However, they still keep tabs on the
moment, place sound and period that left the object devastated, hung
over, and w/ an image permanently scratched and coloured onto his
flesh or hanging in a window.\--

Oi Cheers,

Laz


