
# \"Text\" and the Site of Writing

Jeff Derkson


> > \"That the widespread textualization of the outside world in
> > contemporary thought (the body as a text, the state as a text,
> > consumption as a text) should itself be seen as a fundamental form
> > of postmodern spatialization\...\" (158)
> >
> > \--Jameson, **Postmodernism: Or the Cultural Logic Of Late
> > Capitalism**
> >
> > \"For its part the poststructuralist version of postmodernism
> > worked to exceed both formal aesthetic categories (the
> > disciplinary order of painting, sculpture, and so on) and
> > traditional cultural distinctions (high versus mass culture,
> > autonomous versus utilitarian art) with a new model of art as
> > text.\" (72).
> >
> > \--Hal Foster, **The Return of the Real**
> >
> > \"A provisional conclusion might be that in advanced art practices
> > of the past thirty years the operative definition of the site has
> > been transformed from a physical location---grounded, fixed,
> > actual---to a discursive vector---ungrounded, fluid, virtual.\"
> >
> > Miwon Kwon, **One Place After Another: Notes on Site
> > Specificity**, October 80 (Spring 97): 95.
> >
> > Â 

I\'ve started with this top-heavy loading of quotations to highlight a
general movement from textualization of (generally) the \"outside
world\" and place/site alongside a similar movement within (generally)
art and site-specific art in order to establish a frame to address how
the \"place\" of writing and cultural production could be
rearticulated. Aside from a poststructuralist tendency to read
structures as texts, how does this \"textual turn\" implicate writing
as a constructive act? Has the modernist literary project of writing
an imagined world been deflected through poststructuralism so now the
world is imagined as not only written, but as text?

Parallel to this \"textual turn,\" which leads intriguingly to Mowing
Kwon\'s vague \"discursive vectors," there has been both a related
mapping impulse and a constructive intent directed at \"place." The
mapping impulse is both ontological and geographic (writing as a
mapping of a mind or of subjectivity, writing as part of the process
of realizing \"place\"). In popular media, texts, particularly novels,
are given a primarily ontological role, of telling us something about
the places we live in, and by extension to tell us something about
\"ourselves\" or to illuminate the author as subject. Geographically,
the constructive intent is perhaps clearest in a national
literature\'s assembling of images and icons to create the imagined
place of a nation and to the related levels of regional literatures
and urbanist texts.

In contemporary art, a sort of sociological turn and mapping has
emerged. Hal Foster cites Dan Graham\"s "Homes for America" which
\"mapped\" typologies of American suburban houses as well as the taste
that they constructed and were based on, and "Twenty-Six Gas Stations"
by Ed Ruscha as examples of the \"sociological mapping\...implicit in
some conceptual art\" (185). More recently, and more ironically and
more internationally, there is Komar & Melamid\'s \"The People\'s
Choice\" ([http://www.diacenter.org/km/]{.underline}) which uses
official polling agencies to survey a nation\'s preferences in visual
art based on approximately ten preferences (ranging from \"Favorite
color\" to \"Prefer indoor or outdoor scenes\") and then realizes the
\"most wanted painting\" and \"most unwanted painting\" utilizing the
information. While this project is lightly politicized around issues
of taste and in its adaptation of the current political tendency to
base policies on poll results, it is linked to current site-specific
art practices which, as Kwon notes, \"routinely engage the
collaborative participation of audience groups for the
conceptualization and production of the work\....\" From this
collaboration, these site-oriented works \"are seen as a means to
strengthen art\'s capacity to penetrate the sociopolitical
organization of contemporary life with greater impact and meaning. In
this sense the possibilities to conceive of the site as something more
than place---as repressed ethnic history, a political cause, a
disenfranchised social group---is a crucial conceptual step in
redefining the public role of art and artists\"(96). A recent
example---and there are many---of this laying bare of the historical
determinants of place is realized in Stan Douglas\' Nu\*tka\* which
presents a \"Canadian Gothic\" of late-nineteenth century Nootka Sound
on the Northwest Coast of B.C. through interlacing video images of the
area and disembodied voices of the Spanish and English colonizers.

This chronotopic imagining of place as the site of a repressed racial
(ethnic, class and gendered) history has been an obvious project of
literature. In Canadian literature, this project was determined both
discursively and historically. Discursively, the embarrassingly narrow
yet dominant critical trope assigned to the national literature the
role of providing a history to a country strategically defined as
having none. This necessitated a \"return of the repressed\" in
literature to counter the dominant literary (national) historical
projects. Historically, Canada has imagined itself as bicultural and
this framework worked to suppress the histories of groups other than
the French and English. Within this very generalized framework,
official and aestheticized responses to this historical repression
have emerged. Small-town history chronicles that celebrate a town such
as **Morden in Manitoba**, which can be bought at City Hall (here in
Austria these projects are very similar and are called Heimatbuch
\[roughly, \"homeland book\"\]) or a book such as Andreas Schroeder\'s
**The Mennonites** which provides, in a coffeetable book format, a
history of the Mennonites in Canada. More well known, and with a
larger cultural impact, Joy Kogawa\'s novel **Obasan** brought forward
the history of the Japanese-Canadian internment. Yet the moment that
novelists are taken as historians is as problematic as when artists
are believed to be sociologists or social workers. For instance,
Michael Ondaatje\'s **In the Skin of a Lion** aestheticizes the
history of working-class people in Toronto, as if the workers
appreciated the modernist aesthetics of the worksite and the
solidarity of shared labor rather than complained about the relations
of production and wages.

That these textual and visual models present place and site as being a
manifestation of history can lead to a deflecting of the present. For
instance, Roy Miki speculates that **Obasan** could, from one vantage
point, \"become an object of knowledge as a Canadianized text that
teaches us about racism in our past\" (**Broken Entries** 143). The
implication is that racism is relegated, chronotopically, to the past.
Douglas\' **Nu\*tka\***, in its return of repressed history, could
mimic the trope of First Nations\' culture as a relic of the past, as
being only determined by European actions, as the passive site where
the history of dominant culture is acted out.

Here I want to speculate on (and politicize in a different way),
Kwon\'s idea of place as a \"discursive vector\" as a means to situate
oneself within a present site. I write \"politicize\" because it is
possible to propose a move from text to discourse as a movement from a
static structure open to analysis (whether virtuoso or standard) to a
constructing determinant of place and subjectivity. Here place/site
would not solely be determined by histories (dominant or repressed:
emergent or residual), but by competing constitutive discourses that
both affirm and erode the local/national and the everyday in the name
of the global. Without solely reducing globalization to the effect of
a discourse, it is possible to perhaps clarify the effects of
globalization by understanding them as being discursively enacted at
one level, as having a constitutive effect. Discursive is not
synonymous with \"fluid,\" \"ungrounded,\" as Kwon proposes, but is
precisely constitutive and grounding. In this formulation, the
particularisms of a place/site and its histories are not just the
oppositional force to globalization (or the corrective to dominant
historical narratives), but an aspect of place that can be utilized by
globalism; that is, a dialectic of local and global, or site and
nonsite (if a place is imagined as siteless in its loss of
particularities due to globalization).

My own turn toward the discursive effects of globalism in relation to
place/site arose because of the contradictions I saw in the city in
which I was living. The city of Calgary in Alberta imagines itself as
a regionally-based \"open-for-business\" kind of city, free of, but
also wary of, the ills of larger cities, yet a city of international
standards. This discourse of regionalism serves to cloak the existing
relations of production which Calgary---as an \"oil town\"---is linked
into, and determined by. Global capital through the multinational oil
and gas industry whose corporate logos hover above Calgary\'s gridded
streets is a key determinant of both the social relations of the city
and how the city imagines itself. When the oil industry is profitable
(due to high crude prices or a manufactured crisis), the city thrives
and new homes are built, rents rise, corporate headquarters shuffle,
cigar bars and fusion-cooking restaurants open---in short, a lot of
money is made by a few people but the scramble for profit is on. This
imaginary masking of real relations, a kind of cognitive masking, is
what Arjun Appadurai cites as fetishistic: \"The locality (both in the
sense of the local factory or site of production and then extended
sense of the nation-state), becomes a fetish that disguises the
dispersed forces that actually drive the production process\"
(**Modernity At Large**, 42). In Calgary, the global forces then have
a direct effect on the planning and layout of the city, as well as the
architecture; the social space of the city (itself a constituting
aspect), is determined by the management of the effects of
globalization and localization. Seeing how the effective discourses of
place/region and nation could serve as a mystifying factor, blocking
the real relations of the city, I moved away from an investigation of
place and toward the discursive determination of a place/site.

As a writer, the emphasis on the constitutive discourses of site/place
can supplement site as repressed histories. These discourses must also
be seen, alongside repressed histories, as historical developments, as
constitutive elements of the repressed history and emergent history.
The site of writing then becomes imagined as a place of intersecting
discourses: not groundless and fluid but both determined and
determining.

::: {.Section1}
:::


