
# The Avenue

Laird Hunt


*[In my skull is an avenue I stroke](huntA.html)*

*Clark Coolidge*

 

There is an avenue in my skull too---albeit one that is poorly
maintained, cavernously pitted, strewn with rubble, whole segments
blasted away; one that is curved, possibly circular, that, like the
backgrounds in cartoons, maddeningly repeats itself; one that is
ill-marked, with many a false turn-off and many a false vista; one
that is skewed out of proportion, that is frequently unsafe, almost
always unsavory; one that is troubled by converging lanes, of which
there are hundreds, that even resembles a parking lot in places and is
probably haunted \-- [hell of a place](huntB.html). And yet, [I,
narrator](huntC.html), stroke it, speak through its mess, speak of its
mess, multiply it. It\'s an interesting dilemma---aspects of which are
taken up in Adorno\'s seminal essay on the place of the narrator in
the contemporary novel \-- the narrator, with no story to narrate,
[narrates anyway](huntD.html), a story that has been blown to bits. Of
course not everyone sees it that way. We live in [an age of errata, of
misinformation, of disinformation, of hoax](huntE.html); perhaps it is
little wonder that there continues to be such a hunger for narratives
that, as Adorno describes them, largely by way of 19th century
techniques [mimic the real](huntF.html); that say to us, with
disarming earnestness, this, my friends, is [how it was](huntG.html).
In the domain of the fictive narrative, I tend to have little patience
for such works. I am much more interested in (and seem only capable of
constructing) narratives that are to some degree aware of [the
provisional nature of their own authority](huntH.html), in which [the
fictive quality of recollection](huntI.html) is acknowledged, in which
[forgetting](huntJ.html) is considered the key constituent of memory,
and in which, finally, getting it right shares center stage with
getting it wrong.

 

 


