
# Why I Write Narrative

Trevor Joyce




But, first: why not? A chain of telling that requires discrete and
distinct figures, already in some sense familiar, acting across a
background, largely unexamined and abandoned merely to suggestion,
towards the achievement of, or the failure to achieve, certain goals,
whose importance holds the earlier periods in suspense until in some
final resolution all that is significant crystallizes in a perfection
of plot and motivation, and all the rest, wanting any real brush with
language, retreats once more to ground: that\'s narrative as I knew it
thirty years ago, and it seemed then, as it does now, inadequate to
the world of my experience.


To avoid the fate of perpetrating such stuff, I instead wrote a poetry
which found itself increasingly characterized by argument,
deploration, pleading, threats, until I realized that I didn\'t like
how that worked either, and stopped writing altogether for about
twenty years.


But I went on thinking and planning and testing and learning, though
largely just in imagination. I took a shine to the detective genre in
which, in theory, any object or event can be a clue and, as such, be
exalted into meaning as the everyday world sifts through the riddle of
observation, inference and deduction. But, even there, the world
existed only towards an end in which all might be revealed, and the
head of Holmes had a strictly limited inventory capacity.


Eventually, it was only in the parallel forensics of Gombrowicz\'s
\"Cosmos\" that I found some satisfaction with detection, since
nothing is revealed there, and the patterns and clues are rubbish and
trivial chatter remains fraught, even on rereading.


I had by this time resumed writing poetry, though with conventional
narrative either expunged or twisted, and temporal change borne
instead by repetition, either incremental or with calculated
variation. My models for this were in the refrain structures of
folk-song, often mediated through the likes of Yeats or Lorca, and in
the interplay of stasis and movement in Chinese parallel verse. I was
forced to recognize, however, that the \'lyric\' mode which I
practiced was quite as prone to exclude the incoherent world as was
the mannered narrative I so distrusted. I had also encountered Cage
for a second time, and with more understanding of how the play of
ambient noise across the receptivity of his spaces might circumvent
those exclusions and admit what might otherwise not be acknowledged.


I wrote a longish \'bicameral\' piece called **Syzygy**, consisting of
two halves, "The Drift" and "The Net" respectively. "The Drift"
consists of twelve compact, elliptical, but distinctly \'lyric\'
poems. "The Net" is a single poem of 72 long lines, comprising 24
three-line stanzas. Significantly these two sections are made up of
exactly the same phrases reordered, rigorously and exhaustively mapped
through a one-to-one matrix, the exact structuring of which is not
directly relevant here. There is a brief set of notes added, which
ground some of the detailed references of "The Drift" within the
empirical world.


For me, much of the significance of the poem is in the way in which
sequences of phrases in "The Net," arrived at through the blind
deploymen of predetermined procedures, carry a force both of lyricism
and of narrative, intense though severely fragmented in both cases,
which revealed a meaning different from and additional to anything I
had deliberately written into the work. Having lived with it for over
two years now, I have come to understand that \"with the first dream
of fire they hunt the cold\" and how \"devastation fell attending
headbone the high\" while \"outside the foundries the clumsy the
deadlocked disintegrates\" though \"not a tremor manifests the rare
the quickening across these settlements\" . So, I had confirmed for
myself that a densely overdetermined language, functioning in its most
intensely personal mode of the lyric, could survive radical disruption
and return from that alienation a yield which the reader might gather.
It gave the world an in.


I had meanwhile read all the Fu Manchu novels of Sax Rohmer, intrigued
the Chinese Doctor\'s ceaseless attempts to appropriate the world by
abducting experts in all fields, whose task was to analyse and
replicate in enhanced form all aspects of the workaday world. It
matched my sense as a child that what I saw in mirrors was a world
diligently assembled by unseen agents to match that which I inhabited,
and I watched carefully for small discrepancies to justify that sense,
but never found them, and the specialists of Fu Manchu\'s underworld
empire attended only to the great realms of science, technology,
politics, always were disbanded by resurgent law before their analysis
could address the classified advertisments in the newspapers, the torn
betting slips outside a bookie\'s shop, the inconsequential gabbling
of drunks in a pub. The workings of what I came to know, through Marx,
Adorno and Benjamin, as phantasmagoria fascinated and appalled me. And
how is responsibility to be assigned across mock-worlds if not through
the causal chains which are narrative\'s stock-in-trade?


Therefore:


| while detailed depositions state
| how further on
| within the wood
| . . .
|
| 
| the bright axe
| blossom suddenly
|
|
| the long bones lever
| up from it like anthers
| and beyond the startling
| calyx of teeth
|
|
| an avid buzzing perishable
| fruit set thicken
| and disintegrate
| to load with sweet
|
|
| secure deposits
| of afflicting gold
| their remote cells . . .


Here is not just one narrative, but two. Firstly, the sequence of
blossoming, the detail of anther and calyx expanding, the fruiting
adumbrated in the gathering of bees about the flower, and their
dispersal to the hive where they load the cells with honey. This
apparently natural and value-free sequence is overlaid on another
causal chain, which starts with the felling of a tree by a logger with
an axe (commercial or strategic deforestation has a long and
significant history in Ireland as in much of the developing world
today). From this action, the causal sequence is run backwards,
seeking earlier sources where responsibility may be assigned: the long
bones of the arm, the gasping jaw of the labourer, give way to the
investors depositing their profits in banks. This single instance is
simple, but the structure of reversed causality running back from an
act of violence against the person or ecological ruin, masked
meanwhile by a natural sequence of a bird fledging or a mineral
cystallizing, is repeated twice more in the poem, broken by cases for
and against the possibility of asylum amid such wilderness. Here, I
began again to write narrative because the forensic process it allows
seemed to me necessary to any possibility of living ethically, of
recognizing and fulfilling due responsibility.


Another narrative genre which interested me is that of scientific
experiment, where the researcher actively intervenes in the course of
nature, attempting to limit the causal influences at work, so that one
element may be manipulated, and the change in another, dependent
element, observed and measured. It is intended that the record of
correct prediction and accurate calculation of effect may then grant
understanding of what was previously obscure.


\"A body thrown vertically down from the top of a tower moves through
a distance of 88 feet during the third second of its flight.
Calculate, then, the speed of projection, and determine the speed at
which the sleeve begins to move upwards.\"


And yet, it is in a field complex with uncertainty, that we attempt to
understand, to categorize, to measure, and the experimenter must
attempt to exclude all forces not considered relevant to the
investigation, and accurately account for all that ensues.


\"When he attempted to speak to her, the patient jumped off the bridge
falling some 30 feet into about 20 feet of water. There is always a
chance therefore that the critical act or change may take place when
the observer\'s eyes are withdrawn.\"


Yet we must dispassionately observe, measure and record.


\"Mild plethora of the face ensued, it being divided into three parts,
namely: the forehead, fair complected, one; the nose, another, sand
present in abundance there admixed with small crustacean shells; and
from the nose to chin, exhibiting extensive tooth loss though with
roots intact, another. Notice the blood tinged fluid coming from
mouth. Red is warm and radiates across the ground.\"


In such a manner, sometimes we come to face what can scarcely be
countenanced.


\"It may happen that we are not aware of all the conditions under
which our researches are made. Some substance may be present or some
power may be in action, which escapes the most vigilant examination.
Not being aware of its existence, we are unable to take proper
measures to exclude it, and thus determine the share which it has in
the results of our experiments.\"


Though the outcome be uncertain, may we still presume to have advanced
knowledge in certain quarters? Lacking the machinery of suspense, to
what end may such a narrative aspire?


\"A man has several bones in all, and beauty is lost when meaning and
form are split asunder. The handsome man must be swarthy, and the
woman fair, etc., the genitalia, both internal and external, without
injury. Provisional diagnosis: probable drowning. And had we exhausted
all the known phenomena of a mechanical problem, how can we tell that
hidden phenomena, as yet undetected, do not intervene in the commonest
actions? I will not tell you about the irrational animals, because you
will never discover any system of proportion in them.\"


The plausibility of narrative is increasingly an issue for me, and not
without reason, perhaps, given the dominance of contending
master-narratives in the interpretation of the Irish past and,
consequently, in my present world. From such master-narratives it
seems worth trying to retrieve as much as may still have value. I have
tried this in a recent long work called "Trem Neul"---part prose, part
\'verse\'---which I see as, in part, an attempt to recoup part of the
history of my world from what Beckett terms \'the uniform memory of
intelligence\'. \"Genealogies. The elementary tables. Dictionaries,
assembled in blind frosts. Grammar and chronology. Libraries. Index:
the Encyclopaedia, damascened with ice. So is the perfect body of
knowledge dislimned.\"


How may one conduct a narrative of change, of loss and recovery, of
breakage and continuity, without presuming the existence of distinct
agents, freeing them incredibly from their ground, and committing a
plotwork of events, utterly plausible because familiar and foreknown?
Scholarship has shown us how the integrity and closure of the human
agent was arrived at in early Greek poetry, must we take that achieved
unity as more than provisional? Can we not tell without it?


\"We build ourselves through the world and each through other, and
this proceeds to death as the world alters with experience.\" The
bodies in this plot are not distinct, either from one another or from
their ground, they emerge to make themselves, enjoy a transitory
closure, and then resolve again into a ground which offers further
figures. \"When the biology of your body breaks down, the skin has to
be cut so as to give access to the inside. Later it has to be sewn
back like memory, when it may house all knowledge. Memory is our
comfort and our attire. Fashioned with our hands it is the
accomplishment of our dreams and lapses; always a meaningful pattern
though never an abiding one; a shifting harmony of sub-patterns.
Pretend I\'m lost and try to find me.\"


Because I wish to work comprehensively with the world which I inhabit,
however, and because that world is current with named identities, I
have admitted one such, and one specific narrating voice to speak of
him. I have permitted myself also two specific occasions in time, one
exactly situated starting at about 11 a.m. on February 15th. 1838),
one not. Between the two is a connection, and my essay is to account
for that, to recount it. \"Do not think it coincidental that memory
should begin to fail just as taxonomies become a prominent tool for
thought.\"


As, I believe Braudel and the Annales school refocused history on the
wholeness of ordinary lives, their habits, orientations and crises, by
attending patiently to things left, I see my present course, of
rendering the experience of connectedness, as being sustainable only
through exercising a similar patience with language. No longer
expecting to find there an exact mirror-image of the world I know, but
rather to have it deliver me one I don\'t.


| We will read
| every day
| in the afternoon
| When shall we learn
| to write?
| We shall soon
| learn
| I once went
| to Europe
| but I do not now
| remember
| what I saw
| there
| 

It is in preferring to concentrate on the unpredictable ground rather
than to people it with puppets of my own making that I have elected in
these more recent pieces to work increasingly through collage. Each
fragment of language I adopt is already tale-bearing, a vector:
carrier from a prior host, director of action also across the space of
my world. And the point of such a narrative? Interim figures on an
interim ground; preservation of the complex weave of actions, not
denouement; attachment understood embraced abandoned; wanting
executive or summary.


## Notes

All quotations are from **Syzygy** (Wild Honey Press, Dublin, 1998),
available on the web at the Sound Eye site
http://indigo.ie/\~tjac/Poets/Trevor\_Joyce/Syzygy/syzygy.htm

<!-- 

I'll need to restore the footnotes manually, I think. They seem to have disappeared.

2 **Without Asylum** (Wild Honey Press, Dublin, 1998)
3 "Damaged, we bleed time." This is the central one of a sequence of
three prose-poems called **Hopeful Monsters** (Wild Honey Press,
Dublin, 1999, forthcoming). This section is available on the web at
the Alsop Review site http://www.alsopreview.com/tjdamaged.html
4 Ibid.
5 Ibid.
6 Ibid.
7 Ibid.
8 Samuel Beckett: **Proust** (Calder and Boyars, London) p.32
9 "Trem Neul," section XLII. The complete text will be included in my
forthcoming collected poems, **with the first dream of fire they hunt
the cold** (New Writers\' Press, Dublin, 1999). The title is from a
phrase in the Irish language, meaning \"through my dreams\".
10 I have in mind the first chapters of Bruno Snell\'s **The Discovery
of the Mind** (Harper and Row, New York), and of E.R.Dodds **The
Greeks and the Irrational** (University of California Press,
California).
11 "Trem Neul," section XI.
12 Ibid, section XV.
13 Ibid, section XXXI
14 Ibid, section XXVII


-->
