
# Poison

Kevin Killian





I\'m standing on a flat plain, and then, or so it seems, a little hole
appears in the sand ahead of me (like that movie **Tremors**)? The
hole grows larger in diameter, this is my sanity, and all the little
pieces of my sanity are breaking up and slipping down into the hole.
That\'s what it feels like. I\'m trying to write this piece,
\"Poison,\" about the ways in which the writer\'s personality
dissolves as it weaves in and out of the sentences he or she so
painfully struggles to produce. While writing it I notice a host of
familiar symptoms. Nobody calls me on the phone. I feel so isolated. I
can\'t hear very well and wonder if I\'m going deaf like Beethoven,
like Brian Wilson. When people do speak it\'s with loud, ultra-charged
voices, as though they\'re annoyed with me. I feel like I\'m losing my
mind and with my mind, the meaning of life I once held onto. I used to
think that people are basically good at heart. I used to think I would
be happy someday, but now I feel differently, that there\'s no chance
for me, since that hole before me is opening up and soon everything I
ever clung to will be sucked down into it and I\'ll be homeless and
curled up on the gutter outside my former apartment on Minna Street, a
crack-ridden block South of Market in San Francisco. I just bought a
car and there\'s not really any place to park it.


How did I write a whole book? I\'m trying to remember. In particular
how I wrote **Bedrooms have Windows**, which I loved so much too, I
wrote it in part as a shipwreck victim sends out a message in a
bottle; in particular to my dear friend Terry Black, with whom I\'d
lost touch a few years before. The book has many appeals to him to get
in touch with me. (Before the Internet, through which, apparently,
everyone is available to or traceable by everyone else, this seemed my
only recourse.) I longed to see it in print, feeling that he would
pick it up and call me. But after it was published a mutual friend
sent me Terry\'s obituary, he had died in Richmond, Virginia, of AIDS,
the same month the memoir came out. This was not the answer I had
hoped for. Part of me felt that **Bedrooms have Windows** killed Terry
Black---detailing as it did our sex life and its creation, the way we
had made up sex to answer certain suburban needs for the authentic,
the \"real,\" the colorful. Naming names, his. Implicating others,
him. What portion of one\'s personality is a fiction? It wasn\'t going
to do any good to realize this was a sentimental fantasy, part of the
mind\'s response to the inexplicable horror of AIDS, part of my own
need to find myself on centerstage always. I went back to \"Poison\"
as I delivered it originally, as a talk in Bob Gluck\'s series, *In
Context*, a series of talks delivered week after week at Intersection,
once an important writing venue in San Francisco. This was a happier
time for me---April, 1987. When New Narrative writing seemed wide
open, a place where something entirely new under the sun could be
created. And that we were doing it, doing so. But \"Poison\" I found
out was imperfect, it didn\'t help me. \"Last week Dodie Bellamy\'s
talk stressed the paradox of writing as a two-way street-the
importation of the world into the self, and the generous export of the
self back into the world. Bob\'s talk may have been allied to my own
idea of writing as an expression of the death drive from **Beyond the
Pleasure Principle**---what he calls \'Freudian pleasure based on an
instinct to return to the inanimate.\'\"


Every writing act is an act of dying, or killing, or mortification.
Every time I write it\'s to expose to the air of the page a false part
of my personality. ---I guess this goes directly against Bob\'s theory
of writing, and links mine closer to Dodie\'s, though not in any way
she\'d like or approve of. My talk, I thought, would be a patchwork of
quotations, writing about me written by others; some that I wrote
about other people, lots I wrote about myself, and also work by others
that didn\'t have me in it at all---to give a wide scale against which
I could test my propositions. And the first was from Alan Davies\'
book **Name**, which I found useful in its treatment of the tie
between language and self; is language a function of the word or of
the self? Or vice versa?


The cryptic tongue.
We are getting ourselves
in the mood to have been
done with having been done
with this again.
It\'s all very irreversible
which is what
makes its guts open up.
I wonder how long it will
be until this writes
itself, in
my direction. And we
haven\'t proved
that it isn\'t true yet.
When I think of you
the sentences come,
but I don\'t.




Then I read a passage from Dodie\'s book **The Letters of Mina
Harker**, in which Mina, a fictional character, reflects on her love
life. In this passage I felt myself inextricably named and described,
my human body a vessel for a flood of narrative concerns.


Flaccid, KK\'s penis is endearing, so velvety and shy---but the
trouble with babies (as my mother always said) is that they grow
up---your bed inflates to the breaking point with
thirty-three-year-old male desire panting and prodding *the thing
inside burst through her belly, horror props, sausage links and
ketchup* around my neck KK fastens a locket filled with a snip of his
hair *to protect me from evil* I cross the street with my eyes closed,
cars screech then cease to exist, the atom remains unsplit forever,
cells multiply at a reasonable rate every death is from a natural
cause LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE remember when his
nails were half an inch long, thick, hard, yellowed---he clipped them
off for me parting my capillary pink flesh without a scratch *all it
took was one \"ouch\"* claws retract, breathing softens. He extends
his palm from the bathtub and says, \"Sit on it,\" human form follows
function, in Cocteau\'s **Beauty and the Beast** gloved arms poke out
of the walls holding candles, their flames trembling as Beauty recedes
down the endless corridor *I wish I could walk through mirrors* our
entwined bodies tighten into a circle, a champagne bubble about to be
swallowed by Marilyn Monroe *pushing the metaphor to the breaking
point, in a word: orgasmic* when we fuck we are two great hands
shaking *his cock a thumb* in an explosion of light the bearded
creator in Blake\'s watercolor points from the heavens---mortal heads
bow or stare up in awe and terror the way I do whenever I\'m naked *a
woman\'s hair is never thick enough to hide her thoughts* KK reaches
for a condom, fumbles with its little blue capsule PRESS FIRMLY ON DOT
AND PULL APART *town fathers pack data in time capsules burying them
underground, schoolchildren dig them up, crack them open a hundred
years later. Things.*



I used to ask Dodie, \"Shouldn\'t it be, \'When we fuck we are two
great hands shaking his cock a *giant* thumb?\' Wouldn\'t that make
the passage clearer?\"
She said, \"No.\" That\'s all. Just \"no.\"

At first I was embarrassed by this passage and many others like it in
her writing, for if at any time my penis is flaccid I don\'t want to
know about it, nor the world to suspect it. At the same time, I felt
flattered, singled out by her language as I felt singled out by her
love. \"Beauty recedes down the endless corridor *I wish I could walk
through mirrors*.\" The sense of the syntax issues a seductive
invitation into a mystery world---and I am that mystery. Then the cold
water hit me; with a start I came to and asked the difficult question,
is it I who is being described? *The Letters of Mina Harker* seem to
describe the sex lives, the love lives of two actual people, but of
course they don\'t, they don\'t even especially want to: their veiled
and mediating nature hints at this:


---extends his palm from the bathtub and says, \"Sit on it,\" human
form follows function, in Cocteau\'s **Beauty and the Beast** gloved
arms poke out of the walls holding candles, their flames trembling as
Beauty recedes down the endless corridor

---and so forth, then the phrase \"pushing the metaphor to the
breaking point\" nails it. Do you know the funny feeling you get when
a stranger waves on the street, you wave back, and then you realize
the stranger\'s waving not at you but at the little weirdo behind you
in the brown fedora? One\'s identification with the words that seem to
conjure one up like \"I Dream of Jeannie\" out of black letters on a
white page is like---just like-the way your heart then sinks and a
blush colors your face; except it\'s even more mortifying---that
stranger on the street\'s waving all right, and you wave back, then
you turn around and it isn\'t even a person that stranger is really
waving at, but an atmosphere perhaps, a draft of air. Only convention
associates the wave (or the sentence) to a corporeal body like one\'s
own.

My next example I wrote. I quoted from **Bedrooms have Windows** to
give some idea of what goes through a writer\'s head when he decides
to name real people in potentially scandalous situations-sexual in
this case, but scandalous only insofar as they deal with the body;
also to suggest the peculiar vanity of the writer-and then I\'ll give
it a fairly close reading.


One evening several years ago I was lying in bed, after some
unsatisfactory fumbles towards \"safe sex\" with a writer I once
admired, Dennis A. He turned his head-exactly as he\'d turned mine, an
hour earlier---and get this, he said, \"Why didn\'t you think to take
home that Tom Boll too and we could have had a threesome.\" \"Why
didn\'t I think,\" I replied, an echo of disbelief. \"Dennis, I did
think; I thought and thought. Had I thought any more, I wouldn\'t be
having this safe sex. Madness wouldn\'t have been safe from me.\" I
felt attracted to him when he spelled his name in plastic magnetized
letters on Aaron\'s refrigerator. Then he spelled mine with the same
colorful letters. Language fused. It was like William Carlos Williams.
\"There were plums in that icebox,\" I said to him. \"Forgive me.
Forgive me. I couldn\'t help it; they were so ripe and so purple and
so cold.\"


I doubt if \"memoir,\" the word \"memoir,\" really disguises from the
reader, or listener, that something very close to a real event is
being described. And naturally many people will correctly identify
\"Dennis A.,\" the writer \"I used to admire,\" with the Australian
historian and sociologist Dennis Altman. I figured out that I call him
\"Dennis A.\" to make the narrator\'s personality kind of coy and
obnoxious---and it works, doesn\'t it? Maybe I was miffed because the
sex we had wasn\'t very perfect---or maybe I thought, \"He\'s
forgotten about me, I\'ll employ this sentence to haunt him.\" Writing
as an act of revenge, and naming names a superior way of taking it.
Like a virus, the poison of this passage will break down, over time,
whatever goodwill and nice feeling that I---my body---will have by
then created---like some ghastly race between life and death, immune
system and viral infection. Bob\'s novel Jack the Modernist begins
with a paradigm of intention, deadly intention, \"You\'re not a lover
till you blab about it,\" where the ugliness of the syllable \"blab\"
is meant to suggest a whole medicine cabinet\'s worth of emetic
antidotes to the possibly-too-pretty word \"lover.\"

The same watchful watchdogs will naturally conclude that this pick-up
scene takes place not just in anyone\'s kitchen, in the kitchen not
just of any old Aaron, but in Aaron Shurin\'s kitchen. Maybe they
already know of my admiration for his writing and his influence. When
I first met him I had just read his book **The Graces**, and I was so
struck by it I could hardly connect its author with a living human
being; it was, maybe, a gift from another planet like something out of
Chariots of the Gods. And since then I\'ve gotten to know Aaron better
\"as a person,\" but still blitzed by this admiration which---I see
now!---is another form of objectification, turned outward instead of
inward. Hence there was little psychic difficulty in turning his name,
like a totem, into an amulet to adorn my prose. Hence the repulsive,
shy-making casualness of using that name, \"Aaron,\" and the
social-climbing note its use strikes here, as though I were his
intimate, or perhaps his boyfriend, and what is it in actuality but an
incursion on him, aimed squarely at him at his most domestic and
private, the kitchen setting, the letters on the refrigerator, perhaps
the implied sneer (leftover from the 60s) that the letters are made of
plastic. A plastic language. Doesn\'t sound like a recommendation,
does it? It\'s true that telling stories, \"narrative,\" does involve
a local, in the sense that this quote of mine does have a certain
atmosphere, a sophistication, but it isn\'t really mine, it\'s
borrowed or stolen, the way you or I might borrow someone\'s boyfriend
or wife, return it to them and destroy a relationship like breaking a
milk bottle. (This isn\'t to suggest I haven\'t thought of the
pleasure it brings to writer and reader both, but---maybe because I\'m
a Catholic---it\'s a guilty pleasure; there\'s pleasure in guilt too,
and even if there isn\'t there\'s the dying fall you get when you
string one word after another, after another, onto another, like bugle
beads. The pleasure of accretion.)


Next I\'ll read something I wrote for the \"Jack Spicer\" issue of
**ACTS**. My intention here was to get at what I saw as the malice
characteristic of Spicer\'s poetics, and I couldn\'t think of another
analogy except to describe an occasion from my own life, an occasion
when I felt malice directed at me.



My aim was to develop a visceral writing, a writing that would as
closely as possible parallel the effects of the anonymous letter:
insult, horror, shock and embarrassment. But did my face turn red when
I received one myself:

Dear Kevin Killian:
Your piece \"Tom-Tom\" in the latest issue of **No Apologies** aroused
my suspicion that you must be an asshole. First of all what is a gay
man doing writing about a psycho-killer of women and getting off on
it? I\'m suspicious that it\'s easier for your fantasy screw to get
off when the victim is a (dehumanized) \"Miss Thing\" than if your
homicidal maniac lusted after boys like---just like-you . . . So
what\'s your story? If it isn\'t a good one, this dyke\'ll write you
off entirely.

Threats. Intimidation. A whole map of misreading of my adorable piece.
Again and again I read this letter, each time with increasing unease
and paranoia. I howled into the open air, \"What have I done to
deserve such venom? Who wrote this tripe?\" Despite the writer\'s
declaration, I wasn\'t fooled into believing him a woman. In my heart
I knew this letter is from one of my so-called friends-of the male
species. My only questions were, which one---and why? I\'d been put
into the abject position, one I was to maintain for a long time.
Writing produces deracination, I decided, by own best example. So much
for theory. My content upset \"her,\" I thought to myself. \"Take away
the psycho-killer storyline and there\'d be nothing even a child would
object to.\" And \"her\" form upset me. Isn\'t \"dictation\" Jack
Spicer\'s word for \"receiving the letter\"? You don\'t know where it
comes from; so you react badly. Martians are writing you, altering the
furniture in your room. I wanted a drink so bad I wound up in North
Beach! Bats flying from wall to wall, the whole schmear, and voices
writing all my poems and signing them with Dennis Cooper\'s name!

Here the dominant note of my writing becomes real plain: I\'m talking
about hysteria. I mean that seriously enough, a line that runs a beat
too fast, that\'s capable of all sorts of unexpected connections
(which is good) but because it\'s hysterical is equally capable of
making false connections or ignoring the valid (which is bad). That is
to say, in my heart of hearts I don\'t really believe Dennis Cooper is
signing all my poems. Why, I don\'t even know what I meant by that.
That\'s paranoid, isn\'t it? But I had to find out, what are my rights
as a narrator and character?

When I put myself in this false position, I run the risk all divas
take: we might prove too much for even our greatest fans. And so I\'ve
noticed the characteristic note when others write about me is comic,
often picking on my frailties as a real person and usually, by the
way, noting either that I love the stars, drink a lot of Tab, or also,
you know, drink a lot, of, you know, alcohol. The next passage is from
a story by Francesca Rosa called \"Canidae\" (the Latin word for
\"dogs\"). In it I thought I recognized myself as the writer, \"K.\":



As K. speaks, a worried-looking dog pokes its head through the blue
gauze curtains separating the reading area from whatever is behind it.
A black dog, except that its fur is so sparse the skin shows through,
a gray and black dog then with running eyes; the wattles of its throat
a livid pink. It brings the rest of its body through the curtain and
walks upstage of K. who is telling us a story about Long Island. The
dog explores, listlessly sniffs at the floor, the podium base and
K.\'s ankles. It walks back and forth a few times, turns a slow circle
while digging its teeth into the root of its tail, and then stops to
stare at us, the listeners, again. Not at all shy, confident, as if
resigned in its desolation, like one of those Kafka characters that
have survived their own death. K. does not, or decides not to, notice
his center stage companion, and takes us from Long Island to New York
and then back again.



When I first heard this story I remember she was sitting on stage and
I was sitting in the audience, our narratological positions reversed,
and my ears got red, and a voice rose up in me with a strangled
scream, \"You can dish it out, Kevin, but you sure can\'t take it!\"
In Bob\'s talk,\"Truth\'s Mirror is No Mirror,\" he says, \"I wonder
if we are at the point of reversing Flaubert . . . by accepting an
artificial self, with its own scale, depth and continuity. Eastern
religion responds to a \'made-up\' world with compassion---but with a
fatalism that is the flip side of Flaubert\'s scorn. To the degree we
\'see through\' Flaubert\'s scorn, we suffer from and enjoy a
self-contempt that is close to bragging . . . I wonder if it\'s
possible to be aware of the artifacted nature of the local and not be
contemptuous of it?---to understand it as a construct and be moved by
its depth?\"


I was telling my sister Maureen that I was giving a talk on the
fiction of personality, and she nodded and said she knew what that\'s
about. Sometimes, she said, when she\'s walking down the street she
hears in her head her theme music so she feels she\'s starring in her
own TV show. Elizabeth Bowen wrote, \"Nothing gets on the page that
you started with, and nothing you started gets on the page. To
write,\" she said, \"is to rave a little.\" To this formation I\'ve
added my own strategy, to rave a little before I begin to write, to
exploit the \"fiction of personality\" and to see, if not blinded by
the brushfire, what happens then on the page. When I was seventeen and
living in my parents\' house on Long Island I threw lots of parties,
so did my friends Terry Black and Lance Mallamo, we did so to enjoy
ourselves and to write about them afterwards. This is from a story one
of them wrote about a party I gave, a story that begins with me
warning my parents to stay away from my party and my fun and my
personality and my fictions:


\"All I know,\" pouted Kevin, \"is that I care about this house as
much as anyone else and I think you\'re a hideous couple even to think
I\'d let anything happen to it. Why I just can\'t explain the chills
that go up my spine every time I see it. It\'s like finding a lemonade
stand in the middle of a desert. When I think about the beauty and
splendor of this house tears come into my eyes. Its white walls, its
grapefruit shingles, its collapsible mailbox, the one-of-a-kind sodded
lawn, and, to top it all off like the cherry on a banana split, I
think our Spot, our pedigreed dog, out in the backyard rolling in mud
and barking at all passersby as if to say, \'I\'m black and I\'m
proud!\'\"


Kevin\'s fit of love and tears was interrupted by the doorbell. \"I
just want to say one more thing,\" he said in a hurt voice. \"If I see
either of you downstairs from now until tomorrow morning at ten
o\'clock I\'ll set both of you on fire. Don\'t think I don\'t mean it
either because I\'m pretty sure that I do.\"


With that he stormed out of the room, slamming the door behind him.


Later in the story Terry himself is in a car driving to my party.


\"Terry,\" said Mary Phipps, a girl in the back seat. While drinking a
swig from a bottle of cheap apple wine she continued, \"I\'m glad
you\'re acting like yourself again instead of like Kevin Killian.\"


\"Thank you,\" the courteous Terry replied through gritted teeth. Mary
Phipps smiled at him and he could not help smiling back. They were
true friends and he knew he should listen to what she had to say
whether he liked what she said or not. So he did.


\"Not that we don\'t like Kevin,\" joined in another good friend of
Terry\'s named Sam Rye. \"It\'s just that you\'re not him and we liked
you better as you.\"


Terry resigned himself to the friendly rainstorm of advice, opinions
and admonitions that followed. He could not help wondering though why
it was that Kevin always got almost all the attention and he, Terry,
so little.


But I\'ve argued myself into a corner if I insist that New Narrative
makes room for the stupid, the overblown, and the nasty---these are
three different veins of my writing, each with its own jet flow. The
bizarre thing was that, after I delivered this talk on April 27, 1987,
the woman who had written me the anonymous poison-pen letter lifted
her hand from the audience and said, \"Oh, I wrote that---before I
knew you better.\" Do we get to know people that much better that we
can change our minds so quickly about them? I was stunned. I remain
stunned. I think of life as a big empty desert place---cooler than
Death Valley---but just about as big---\"I know! Let\'s call it Life
Valley!\"

Where, as I pause for a second, clearing my head, trying not to write,
dragging myself from that particular abyss of memory and missed
opportunity, there a small hole appears before me, about fifteen feet
before me. And all the things I brought with me to this valley are in
my trailer, fifteen yards behind. And one by one I lose them down the
ever-expanding hole---cans, jars, movie magazines, photos, food and
books. The hole keeps caving in on itself. My little home on wheels is
silver, rounded like the new Volkswagen models, and drives like a
dream. Its doors shear off with a sudden crunch of metal, bright in
the noon air, they slither across the desert floor into the hole. I\'m
next perhaps, hold on to me.



