
# Monstrous

Camille Roy


Â 

One of the forms of narrative I write is software. Its lucrative.
About four years ago I used stock options to buy a house right around
the corner plus one block from one of the worst housing projects in
San Francisco. A couple thousand people live there. It gives my
neighborhood the highest child hunger rate in the city. Our first
night in the house someone got murdered, just before midnight . It was
a block a way but the shot sounded like it was in our back yard. One
shot, a pause, then another. Purposeful. Somehow I knew it was
intended to kill, and not just a couple of kids shooting at the moon.
Plus the neighbor told us hed had his car stolen 3 times.

Impenetrable poverty plus dumb fuck rules, class and race segregation:
Id moved into the only San Francisco neighborhood that duplicated on a
smaller scale what I grew up with. It annoyed me.

Locality, forever. *Skewed*. Something huge gets mutilated as it
slides through a stuffy tube. Were on the beach very far to the west,
watching what pops out. It contains all of American culture. I came
here so tightly wound. Born on 43rd street south side Chicago & havent
been back since I left the hospital.

From my dining room window, at the rear of the house, the project
looks strangely vacant. There just never seem to be many people
around. The buildings proceed down the hill towards the old industrial
port like giant shabby steps, but there is never anyone on the racks
of balconies. Ive rarely driven through it. Structurally, its sort of
a dead-end place, the way its laid out, like a suburban subdivision:
streets point into it, then twist up like spaghetti. The few
drive-through streets are dotted with dealers scoping out the passing
cars. Im just talking about the roads.

When I first moved in I often found myself dreamily staring out the
dining room window. I wanted to check out one of those balconies. The
view would be amazing, they practically hang over the bay. Developers
have been salivating over that piece of land for years. Nowadaze they
are nibbling at the edges of the project, building expensive live work
lofts for software designers on adjoining vacant industrial land. Its
weird. Different economic classes get spliced together via crimes. The
mode of interaction being criminal. So one day I mentioned to a friend
of mine that I didnt get it, how did dealers get kids to work for
them---playing courier, or delivery boy. What would a dealer have on a
kid? Why get involved with some jacked-up, scary asshole? I felt like
an idiot as soon as the words left my mouth. Patiently, step by step,
my friend explained how it was done, until I could have done it
myself, as obviously he had. All I had to do was ask. Knowledge. The
getting & taking and the tearing up. Did I want to go there?

Of course I did. One day I walked in, took a place on the balcony next
to all of my friends & drank their salty water. I listened to the
radio. I watched as a crack lady ran down the street behind a white
dog. Then the dog was scratching at the door. When I woke up that
sound was the shade, bumping against the window frame. And I was
thinking, as I am always doing and my thinking told me this: *This is
what I want. Its inside my system of attractions. Im penetrated by the
present and its always the same: chronic anger. Awful but refreshing*.

From up here, it is all visible. From down below, also. Radiant
contradiction. Eyeballs: the severely vivid mechanism. Finally what is
seen is not a target but just circumference, expanding. Highlights
scatter across the field.

I walked into the projects a couple of weeks ago. Its right around the
corner, why not just walk? It was a friends birthday. She told me
where she lived, but it wasnt easy to find. The apartments didnt have
numbers on them, you had to just know. I asked a bunch of people. Kids
were running everywhere. How come I hadnt seen them from my back
window? I look whiter than usual, I thought, looking at my hand. Up
here and not even shopping, that made me odd. People looked at me
skeptically. I felt skeptical about myself, but slick, as in greased.
I wanted to fall off my little ledge. Bored with what had gotten
dished up as myself. The backwash of swallowing it. That nausea.

The balcony was great. I hung with my friends and listened to the
radio. They played that song I like, the one about money. Later we
went out to eat birthday steaks.

California is shallow. Thats true. Though it thrills me that I can
walk across the city without getting beat up for crossing some
invisible dividing line of racial turf. Of course I could get beat up
for something else. *Im so easy to please.* Its the instability at the
heart which is to say the heartlessness of just washing away faster.

Im supposed to write about narrativity but these problems of locality
are where I get started. For me writing grinds itself into whats
familiar yet unbearable. Add mobility to that and, voila, narrative.
Disjunction is the formal consequence of this ripping and tearing, and
its packed with information, almost to the point of being insensible.

The streets I walk measure me. They measure you too, through
mechanisms both criminal and friendly. Including that knowledge is a
kind of spectacular innocence\-\--the moment of saturation feels
dazzling, but there is probably no point. Still I love it, formally
and erotically and intimately. Its all about nested structures. I
entrust my twisted little pieces to the warm nest of the sick social
body, and I feel our bond. It nourishes me.

To theorize my point of view, to pursue critical formalism as a ritual
and as a grasp for power, let me put it this way. Narrative provides
context so that the rupturing of identity is recognizable. I think we
are impossible beings. We ruthlessly evade scrutiny, yet recognition
is the beginning of transformative emotion. Its a feeding process. You
dont know if youre creating a monster.

As a narrative writer I improvise recognition. Its like a location
from which mutant beings emerge. This feels true, in life they never
stop emerging. Look\-\--they even swarm through this text. I allow it
because Im terrified and seduced. To encounter them via narrative is
to formalize a moment of surrender.

(An earlier version of this piece was presented at the Portable Talk
Series, SUNY Buffalo.)


