
# Bottoms Up

Gail Scott



MONTREAL, QUEBEC: I return to the site of an old novel. This will
not always be a street of failure, even if still playing the former
glamour of the seedy. French-language covers of country music are
playing on the radio. Men (sit) alone at tables. One with haggard
bearded face. His lower jaw (is) toothless. Teeth in dreams = sex. The
low façades opposite parading peeling tin cornices. An air of
stagnation possibly verging on cliché. I take some verbs out; then put
them in again.

It is the hottest summer ever. Meteorologists are, with divine
hindsight, admitting global warming. To escape the heat, I go to a
dark afternoon theatre. Where a sassy high school troupes performing
Büchners **Wozeck**. The adolescents sweet songs juxtaposed on the
gloom and violence under, somehow dissolving earlier-decade
interpretations foregrounding worn-out existential despair. Crossing a
parking lot behind a smoked meat shop, I am thinking a story, to avoid
eternally returning (to keep it moving), might be structured thus: an
\"older\" woman writer circulates at a \"fringe\" theatre festival of
young artists. She has lost her love. Feels discombobulated. Nothing.
She skirts the crowd asking several 20-year-olds: anything good? She
will then string a humiliated (but raunchy) love tale together,
interlaying bits of youthful sweetness and anger, representing to her
in her present state of emptiness, a more contemporaneously rapid
conflation of beginnings and endings. A word about narrative:

At another table, a man shakes his purple-shirted shoulders in the hot
bar air. To \"Caught With Your Pants Down.\" Drinking straight
tequila. The same table where X and I sat. Discussing why our favorite
writers of new and experimental fiction are not rich and famous. \"Too
abject,\" we say. In a bag at our feet, some cheaply extravagant
dollhouse boudoir furniture purchased for her little son. From the
store with the saggy awning opposite. Leaving, we forget it. Outside
another man passing. With several teeth missing. Teeth = action. But
why the narrator (the woman) endlessly remarking. Such toothless
ghosts of subjects. Among dozens of better-furbished faces. Is her
\"local\" constructed out of some kind of distancing or bias?\* Or
\"mere\" projection of loves losses? I am thinking **not** abject the
subject. Unless negatively framed. At point of crossing space of
(non)-reception between the work and the world. When site (interior)s
signed minor (inadequate). While exterior=dominant. Yet, intrinsic and
extrinsic syntax are not separate; rapidly they mate. Should I be
happy the lover having sex with no one. If having only virtual sex
with me? I take some verbs out. And put them in again. A word about
the waitress:

Dominatrix in clinging leopard-spotted polyester. Small breasts.
Ponytail. Fortyish. Saying (in québécois): UN verre de vin-maison ne
te ferait pas de mal, one glass of house wine will not ruin the
stomach. I.e. its terrible. For 75 cents more you can have a quarter
liter. Adding: you look en forme, terrific. WE tell each other\--in
guise of complimenting\--we haven\'t changed in years. I opting for
the smallest quantity of red vinegar. Now young woman passing by
window. Huge breasts encased in tight halter top. Some little cap over
short hair. And---upper incisors gone. Like the meteorologist, I
admitting only to coincidence of circumstances. Projecting accumulated
lack on unsuspecting bodies. (Waitress bringing unasked for
quarter-liter). Which bodies, in being thus sentenced, already frozen
in past gesture or alias. While environment drifting elsewhere. As in
that restless white river the lover (much later) wanting to attack
with kayak. Drifting eternally toward full-color horizons. The silver
flashes indicating minor notes of salmon struggling upstream. Sitting
close beside her, I encouragingly declaring such projection, battered
by tergiversation of context, likely best position. For
contemporaneous narrator. Just as lover putting hand under skirt cut
on the bias to flare out attractively at the bottom. And saying she
still wanting something with \"us.\" A story is something---you can
put your teeth into:

But what might happen here? With (soon) a closed sign across the
window. Two blocks down. A polished glass and marble multi-story,
multi-venue, multi-media repertory theatre. Having replaced the
crushed blue façade of the smoky cozy café-cinéma where we used to see
old or experimental European French movies. Built by Québécois Soft
Image inventor Daniel Langlois. Were like that here: always
oscillating between the ultra-modern and the crumbling. The sound
systems so efficient, one feels, listening to the Buena Vista Social
Club, as if in some club in crumbling Havana. Though the octogenarian
musicians having mostly ceased performing on their blockaded island.
Because \"nowhere\" to go. Until American Ry Cooder choreographing
their (global) return. I am thinking of when Québec liberationists
claiming solidarity with Cuba. Which solidarity currently updated to
meaning \"corporate opportunity.\" At last, the Cubans playing
Carnegie Hall. I am thinking how any narrative, if fronted, marketed
from economically preferential geographical site, avoiding being
troped as exotically remote, a remoteness that must (paradoxically)
scale global walls or languish. I am thinking of Cuban sunsets,
suffused towards evening with a little blood. Of the womans eye
growing humid, sentimental. When, in the movie, the elderly guitarist
exclaiming: \"There is nothing like a night of love.\" To keep it
moving, I take some verbs out and put them in again. A word about
identity:

Now the waitress in her leopardskin is leaning over the purple shirt.
Whos reading a sexy mens magazine. Pausing, he pulls a huge
fluorescent flashlight still wrapped in hard plastic cover from a bag.
She points out (still speaking \[naturellement\], French): its no good
without batteries. Laughing. I can smell him. The conversation
segueing to European-French actress Catherine Deneuve. The waitress
declaring in drawn-out Québécois dipthongs the Europeans looking down
on, Deneuve \"plate,\" boring: \"Always the same tone.\" Outside a
friend passing by window. Looking for a date. Very strong shoulders.
Her long red hair streaming out behind. I know she has latex gloves in
her bag. Walking naturally, she \"vogues.\" Causing her to get thrown
out of womens washrooms. For being \"wrong\" gender. I am thinking how
certain minor or unusual demeanors, if flaunted, getting read
extrinsically as unappealing or threatening. (In Canada, \"Québécois\"
often = flamboyant or risqué; coincidentally, same thing for
\"queer\"). This can be devastating. Or interesting. Friend passing
again, very feminine in wrap-around skirt, curly red hair. Yet walking
as if faking it. I am thinking how narrator (other). IF not knowing
how friend herself-self-perceiving, able to create a relationship with
reader permitting permutation of both obvious and unspeakable. The
body being capable of gestures contrary to understanding. I am
thinking about narrator as double. About evening out subject/object
weight at each end of sentence. A word about affect:

\[It has never occurred to me to be a poet. The poet, with rare
dazzling exceptions, even when \"absent,\" looms imbricated. In her
total façade of language. While reader happily at play. In her in
sandbox of spaces. Lacking spontaneity, I am drawn to the violence of
animation. Experienced by a subject. Drifting towards object. Across
the placement of the verb. Which nakedness, exposure, seeming somehow
progressive, egalitarian. Yet failing to make woman (narrator) cease
obsession with beginnings (causes) and endings (conclusions). So
trauma still risking terminating in single unbearable seduction scene.
I am thinking of certain literary feminists. Who using devices copped
from poetry. To construct porous or unbounded subject. Capable of
merging \"more\" ecologically with context. I am thinking of the gap
of the unspeakable. There may be no animal boundaryjust the stream and
the pleasure that lies in it, teasing the poet.\*\* I am thinking
about the portentousness of sentencing. Alternately (defensively?), I
am thinking that a sentence in a community of sentences (paragraphs)
somehow leaving impression of consciously reaching out to other(s).
Notwithstanding characteristic narrative flick of head back over
shoulder. At point of the period. For purpose of getting . . .
bearings. This I finding . . . touching. A word about the geography of
the bar\]:

Many empty tables. Two beefs in dark corner. Chairs fading outward.
Towards sunwashed waitress, purple shirt and harsh light of street.
Waitress, flashlight and me. A sign above our heads: \"Les crevettes
de MATANE arrivées!!! [Fraîches.]{.underline} MATANE shrimp in!!!!
Fresh. The drawn-out Québécois fraîîîches savorously feminine and
plural. The waitress and purple shirt still complaining Deneuve
lacking edge. Offering as replacement, Québécoise country music star.
Recently coming out with \"fabulous CD.\" Though \"star\" still having
to work nightly in bars. \"Very tough. If youre pregnant.\" Outside,
young nomad in artfully torn outfit and \$50-dollar-haircut. Asking
for change in anglicized French. They come here from the suburbs. Not
to feel guilty. In this huge dark room with stuffed animals on walls,
I am thinking of simulation in a diminshing French-speaking city,
where everyone considering themselves minority; yet in some way also
faking it. I am thinking of consequence for narrative, so often
straining toward \"natural\" on site where continental popular culture
in perpetual transmigration from Germanic to Latinate. Of Mickey
Mouse, Patsy Klein, Sylvester Stone, moving lips in English. While
saying something else entirely. I am thinking of living on a
Renaissance Ponte Vecchio: less bridge between than Babel of
echoes.\*\* Whose interpretation requiring, precisely, resistance to
meaning. I am thinking of narration as introjection. Many friends have
dentures. A word about hybridity.

Two blocks up. Little stages. Blue-and-white fleur-de-lys flags for
the fête nationale. The Argentinean tango I missed. Somehow having
erased Québec \"patron\" Saint Jean Baptistes bleeding and miserable
little lamb. Featured in earlier decades national feast-day
celebrations.\* Fête progressing north. Group doing samba. Québécois
folk songs. Block production of Molière farce. Free good food.
Everyone speaking French \"with accent.\" Whole family dragging
mahogany dining table out on sidewalk. Now eating supper. Later, I,
sleepless, listening to thunderclaps on John Cage piece. To compensate
for dryness. Leopardskin waitress offering another glass of vinegar.
Muscled guy in tight sleeveless t-shirt and gleaming chain with cross.
I am thinking of narrative as opaque barrier. There is no limit
between life and deathly fascination. Viva Che! on wall. Now I must go
before another cigarette. Buy food. Take messages. If any. The disease
is not under control. Police car outside.

 

## Bottom Notes

This piece is dedicated to Carla Harryman.

It is in dialogue with other writers and other texts, including the
writing of, and conversations with, Dianne Chisholm, Robert Glück
(notably re: the narrator as bottom), Carla Harryman, Camille Roy, and
Sarah Schulman.

\*\* Textual references are to Barrett Wattens **Total Syntax**, a
cover citation from **Sight** by Lyn Hejinian and Leslie Scalapino,
and Sherry Simons essay \"The Ponte Vecchio and the Comma of
Translation.\"

Saint Jean Baptiste Day, June 24, is a national feast day in Québec.

 
