
# Anne Stone: Why write narrative when you could be the next guest on the Jerry Springer show!



I met someone whose tattoo had been sliced out of his arm, leaving a
jagged scar in place of the name of city he was born. I understood the
urge, to inject a place under your skin, only to have it removed like
a second stomach or a wart. Lately, I've been thinking a lot about
place. If you ask me where Im from, I can answer in a lot of different
ways, none of which would tell the whole story, or even manufacture
the kind of sense I would want to live with. I could show you the scar
on my leg and point to an intersection, or trace the scar angling up
from the first phalange on my index finger, pointing out the parking
lot where the Streetsville liquor store used to be. I could tell you
about strip malls, or stock yards, or franchised donut shops that
remind me of Dresden the morning after, draw you a map of the
territory in the fine sprinkling of ash collecting on a Formica
counter. I could tell you about the derelict cornfields that used to
be where that donut shop is now, or the first place I lived in
St.-Henri, show you the abandoned granary that burned to the ground
seven years ago and has since been replaced by industrial trailers. Or
maybe the building I lived in itself, which is sealed off now. I might
point out the remains of a much older structure, a series of
barn-board sheds. I would go to one of those sheds each afternoon to
write. The pick-up-sticks anatomy of that place inspired local kids
into acts of arson. I dont know if it was my own narrative tendencies
or the steady supply of thirteen year olds with zippos, but it was the
first part of the building they chose to tear down.

I should tell you, before we go any further, that the scar is really
on my pointer finger. You should know this story is not particularly
reliable and, as a friend told me once while I was staring absently at
a menu, the map is not the territory.

Somehow, during the months I spent in that shed, writing what would
become **jacks: a gothic gospel**, the smell of the packing plant my
father took me to as a girl infiltrated the barn-boards. The plant was
on his delivery route, and I used to stop off at the stock yards to
pet the shit-stained flanks of cows as they were herded into
slaughter. St-Henri reeks of my childhood and the Streetsville liquor
store is as organized as a months supply of birth control pills, the
bins of national and international wines formatted on the principle of
a 28-day dial, the kind that comes complete with seven sugary pills to
remind you of the color red. When I think of all the places that have
come to dereliction, I understand myself in terms of the word
tenacious. I know it is only my thinking that makes it so. I dont know
if they hand out birth control pills to fourteen year olds anymore,
the kind that remind me of a flattened representation of a monthly
agenda or a rolodex with a daily regimen of business cards. I do know
that the smell of those stockyard cows do not belong in this essay.
Nor does the way they kill cows in the Eastern Townships, which is
much more and much less personal.

I also think its important to tell you, before I go any further, that
I am not a vegetarian.

On my friends farm, the breeders have names like Sophia or, out of
earshot, are called after her daughters-in-law. The cows she will
slaughter and wrap herself are named after beige-toned bureaucratic
dociers. When I first met the woman who owns this farm, I asked about
the cows and was given the names of the breeders and the bull, the
others implied by a slurred ellipsis or existing as the space-off to
her story. I persisted, asking about one of the cows shed passed over.
"T-2306? Or do you mean that one?" she asked, pointing to Sophia,
"theyre sisters." A little later that day, she promised to save that
cows thigh-bone for my dog.

The cows exist in terms of place. The cows of the stockyard and the
cows of the townships farm are the same breed, indistinguishable,
except for their deformation in terms of place. Even their smells are
different. Sophia and T-2306 are twin sisters, born on the same day,
from the same uterus.

If I were to write about T-2306, I would want something of that
tension to come through. The format of the place infiltrating
something which might be appalled identity. Or perhaps by identity I
mean body-as-place. If I were a photographer, I might take a
long-exposure photograph, the kind that effaces her body if it implies
movement, if her body-as-place shifts in relation to geographical
setting. The immobile objects and landscape would exist in the picture
as perfect solids. It would be an unremarkable photo, except for the
way you could see right through the cow to everything behind it.
Except for the way the picture would be taken as daylight gave way to
dark, and something of that lumen would gather the hide together into
the appearance of a bruise.

The length of exposure is an interesting way for me to begin to think
about length in narrative. As I am given to understand the technique,
if you lengthen the time that the shutter is open, the camera slowly
tucks whatever light there is into an objects surfaces. Ive seen night
photos taken with a long exposure, the light isnt reflected off the
surfaces of an object so much as collected there, staining the fabric.
The light appears to be a dirty liquid, seething up from under. The
implications fascinate me, the way that pulling sight long can deform
what is there, or ways of seeing it.

Thankfully, I am not bound to a single snapshot, because I want to
examine (and re-examine), lit (et relire), bed (and embed), these
surfaces, under-pinning the impoverished look of St-Henri, for
instance, with the reek of a west-end Toronto slaughter house, twenty
years distant in time, and 600 kilometers away. I want the space-off
of the shed I started writing **jacks** in to be that terrifying
plant. God: What is that? What is it? The dingy white towers next to
the stockyards are organized vertically, even though, as everybody
knows, cows are organized horizontally---they are grazers, right? So,
between the slaughterhouse and the packing plant some terrible
deformation of what it means to be a cow occurs, the axis of cowness
undergoes a grotesque skew. How do you even fit the word "cow" in a
building that tall? What could a building with elevators possibly have
to do with a cow? When I was a girl, I wasnt afraid of the men with
electrical prods, or the smell of shit and death. But I was terrified
by those vertical towers. I knew they embodied a cold and impersonal
force. If I called out to the men prodding the cows, for instance, I
could get them to talk to me, stop what they were doing for a while. I
doubted my presence could effect a pause when it came to anything in
or about those buildings. It wasnt so much that I didnt exist, as it
was that in their terms, I could not possibly exist. I lacked the
relevance to insist my own axis likewise undergo some miraculous
Holstein shift from x to y. The plant excluded all terms but those
present in its formula. If I had GoÃ«dal for a companion on those walks
through the slaughterhouse, they might have made another kind of
sense. As it is, the memory refuses my attempts at sense-making, and
continues to fascinate me twenty years later. The shed I came to
narrative in has been torn down, and the vertical granary -- the one
that existed at the place where Beaudoin stutters to a stop at rue
St-Ambroise, the one that once implied the axial-shift undergone by a
field of wheat -- burned to the ground one winter night as I watched.
These places have a grammar that I am only now beginning to grapple
with (or make-up).

I should probably confess that Ive apprehended a similar syntax in
unfamiliar restaurants. Once, a maitre-D unfolded my body like a table
cloth, the surface tension flattening and lengthening my body to the
skin of water, it delineated a lumen that precisely. Sensing some
terrifying grammar, I found that the only punctuation legible to me
were the round bottoms of oven-warmed plates pressing into my back
like a series of medieval cups. The kind 17th century doctors heat
with candles before placing in rows on either side of the spine,
creating a series of tiny vacuums to draw the suspected impurity up
from under. I find restaurants inscrutable. I mean, who would think to
spell the word "spent" on a plate in a diagonal line of cutlery? But
god, the relief to discover there was a silent means to signal an
impending departure.

What happens in the meantime? As your liminal-linen body hosts a
series of plates? And yes, physically, the body is a place that can,
with some effort, be occupied by one's self, or by others.

I am not at a restaurant. If I close my eyes, I lose my boundaries,
the air is tepid against my skin, no rough frisson strokes this
surface. I am not sensitive enough to maintain a secure sense of where
I end and something other begins. That requires a lepers perpetual
gaze to the extremities. If I were to close my eyes and begin typing
by rote, you would have to remind me: Where are my arms just now? my
fingers...

I am only sure of the tips. As they pad against the keys. One of my
fingers describes an unstable arch. Ive pulled a tendon with this
incessant tapping. It must be a very tiny tendon, the kind of thing
you might extract from the haunch of a bisected frog. Eyes closed, I
am the stoop of shoulders, the curve of a sore finger, and a series of
insensitive pads Ive developed as a result of my obsessive
predilection for narrative -- long narrative.

This is where I am today, and not at a restaurant packing plant. I am
at the place the scar on my index finger describes, an intersection
between place and the body. Writing narrative affords me a lateral way
in which to think about the body, about place, about the body in
place, about the body as place. In **Hush**, written very much like
those long-exposures I talked of earlier, the women exist in terms of
place---a narrative focus that, on the surface, would deny movement.
But writing against the vertical axis, implying it, even as I choose
to write on the horizontal plane, I can let a particular image accrete
to itself all sorts of other resonances---not just in the way a
particular image occurs in relation to her-body, Roses body, Loralies
body, but how it recurs, in relation to other events or objects or the
place itself.

Plot is a term that I hear twice, I hear the English plot and the
franÃ§ais plotte, or cunt---so it is a gendering of narrative. I am not
about plot. But am about this other form of plotting in narrative. Of
telling a story that unfolds at the level of language, where the words
I use recur over the length of the narrative. The repetition becomes
skewed, and what it touches, likewise becomes communicable. It isnt
mood, or even sensibility Im aiming at, though thats what descriptive
words are employed for a lot of the time. No, what is here is as
convoluted as the vaginal tract of a snail, and though yes, snails
plottes are bundled relatively small, they do possess immense surfaces
to play on.

I should admit Ive forgotten the word for a word that is descriptive.

Where am I going next? I want you to imagine a picture taken with a
very long exposure. No. I want you to imagine you think of the phrase
"glory-hole" every time you hear the word exposure, and then I want
you to imagine a picture taken with a very long exposure. A picture
taken on a night at the circus. The temporal trace of the antics of
acrobats and Dahlmer-clowns rendered in fly-wheels of color. Are you
sufficiently distracted? Good. Because until a moment ago I was
holding a Polaroid in my hand. It was a very old picture, or else,
someone has gone to a lot of trouble to make it look that way. The
edges are black from fingering. If I was going to show you the
picture, evidently, I changed my mind, because while you were looking
at the circus-shot, I slipped the picture into my pocket and lit a
cigarette.

I think you should know that I am familiar with the practical
applications of luting agents.

