# Quotes from the Editors

## Quotes from Bob Glück

In guise of an "editorial," we gave ourselves the task of contributing quotes that seemed exemplary or important to us as writers at this time. Informed by science (Burke's notion of coarse-graining, implying the production of prose as pattern), by references Biblical, Benjaminian, post structuralist, post-Marxist, Oulipo-ian, etc., these cut-outs, compounded, comprise our narrative about Narrativity. For now. Signed Mary. Camille. Bob. Gail.
 


## From *Antonin Artaud Anthology*, ed. Jack Hirschman

From this pain rooted in me like a wedge, at the center of my purest
reality, at the point of my sensibility where the two worlds of body
and mind are joined, I have learned to distract myself by the effect
of a false suggestion.

For in the space of that minute the illumination of a lie can last, I
manufacture a notion of escape; I rush off in any wrong direction my
blood takes. I close the eyes of my intelligence and open my mouth to
the speech of the unspoken; I give myself the illusion of a system
whose vocabulary escapes me. But from this minute of error there
remains the feeling that I have snatched something real from the
unknown. I believe in spontaneous bewitchments. It is impossible that
I shall not some day discover a truth somewhere on the routes my
blood carries me.


## From *The Gospel According to Thomas*

Jesus saw some little ones nursing. He said to his disciples, What
these little ones who are nursing resemble is those who enter the
kingdom. They said to him, So shall we enter the kingdom by being
little ones? Jesus said to them, When you make the two one and make
the inside like the outside and the outside like the inside and the
above like the below, and that you might make the male and the female
be one and the same, so that the male might not be male nor the
female be female, when you make eyes in place of an eye and a hand in
the place of a hand and a foot in place of a foot, an image in place
of an image then you will enter the kingdom.


## From *Foucault/Blanchot, Maurice Blanchot*: \"The Thought from the Outside\" by Michel Foucault


If the only site for language is indeed the solitary sovereignty of
\"I speak\" then in principle nothing can limit it---not the one to
whom it is addressed, not the truth of what it says, not the values
or systems of representation it utilizes. In short, it is no longer
discourse and the communication of meaning, but a spreading forth of
language in its raw state, an unfolding of pure exteriority. And the
subject that speaks is less the responsible agent of a discourse
(what holds it, what uses it to assert and judge, what sometimes
represents itself by means of a grammatical form designed to have
that effect) than a non-existence in whose emptiness the unending
outpouring of language uninterruptedly continues.



## From **The Madness of the Day**, by Maurice Blanchot, trans. Lydia Davis

I am not learned; I am not ignorant. I have known joys. That is
saying too little: I am alive, and this life gives me the greatest
pleasure. And what about death? When I die (perhaps any minute now),
I will feel immense pleasure. I am not talking about the foretaste of
death, which is stale and often disagreeable. Suffering dulls the
senses. But this is the remarkable truth, and I am sure of it: I
experience boundless pleasure in living, and I will take boundless
satisfaction in dying.


I have wandered: I have gone from place to place. I have stayed in
one place, lived in a single room. I have been poor, then richer,
then poorer than many people. As a child I had great passions, and
everything I wanted was given to me. My childhood has disappeared, my
youth his behind me. It doesn\'t matter. I am happy about what has
been. I am pleased by what is, and what is to come suits me well
enough.


Is my life better than other peoples lives? Perhaps. I have a roof
over my head and many do not. I do not have leprosy, I am not blind,
I see the world---what extraordinary happiness! I see this day, and
outside it there is nothing. Who could take that away from me? And
when this day fades, I will fade along with it---a thought, a
certainty, that enraptures me.


I have loved people. I have lost them. I went mad when that blow
struck me, because it is hell. But there was no witness to my
madness, my frenzy was not evident: only my innermost being was mad.
Sometimes I became enraged. People would say to me, Why are you so
calm? But I was scorched from head to foot; at night I would run
through the streets and howl; during the day I would work calmly.


## From \"Crossing into Poland\" by Isaac Babel trans. Walter Morison, **The Collected Stories**.

Fields flowered around us, crimson with poppies; a noontide breeze
played in the yellowing rye; on the horizon virginal buckwheat rose
like the wall of a distant monastery. The Volyns peaceful stream
moved away from us in sinuous curves and I was lost in the pearly
haze of the birch groves; crawling between flowery slopes, it wound
weary arms through a wilderness of hops. The orange sun rolled down
the sky like a lopped-off head, and mild light glowed from the cloud
gorges. The standards of the sunset flew above our heads. Into the
cool of evening dripped the smell of yesterdays blood, of slaughtered
horses. The blackened Zbruch roared, twisting itself into foamy knots
at the falls. The bridges were down, and we waded across the river.
On the waves rested a majestic moon. The horses were into the
cruppers, and the noisy torrent gurgled among hundreds of horses
legs. Somebody sank, loudly defaming the Mother of God. The river was
dotted with the square black patches of the wagons, and was full of
confused sounds, of whistling and singing, that rose above the
gleaming hollows, the serpentine trails of the moon.

# Quotes from Camille Roy

# Excerpts from \"The Storyteller,\" by Walter Benjamin[^i]

The art of storytelling is coming to an end. Less and less frequently
do we encounter people with the ability to tell a tale properly. More
and more often there is embarrassment all around when the wish to
hear a story is expressed. It is as if something that seemed
inalienable to us, the securest among our possessions, were taken
from us: the ability to exchange experiences.

One reason for this phenomenon is obvious: experience has fallen in
value\... \[The nature of every real story is that\] it contains,
openly or covertly, something useful. The usefulness may, in one
case, consist in a moral; in another, in some practical advice, in a
third, in a proverb or maxim. In every case the storyteller is a man
who has counsel for his readers. But if today \"having counsel\" is
beginning to have an old-fashioned ring, this is because the
communicability of experience is decreasing. In consequence we have
no counsel either for ourselves or for others.

Every morning brings us the news of the globe, and yet we are poor in
noteworthy stories. This is because no event any longer comes to us
without already being shot through with explanation. In other words,
by now almost nothing that happens benefits storytelling; almost
everything benefits information. Actually, it is half the art of
storytelling to keep a story from explanation as one reproduces it.

The value of information does not survive the moment in which it was
new. It lives only at that moment; it has to surrender to it
completely and explain itself to it without losing any time. A story
is different. It does not expend itself. It preserves and
concentrates its strength and is capable of releasing it even after a
long time.

*Boredom is the dream bird that hatches the egg of experience.*
Today people live in rooms that have never been touched by death, dry
dwellers of eternity, and when their end approaches they are stowed
away in sanatoria or hospitals by their heirs. It is, however,
characteristic that not only a man\'s knowledge or wisdom, but above
all his real life---and this is the stuff that stories are made
of---first assumes transmissible form at the moment of his death.
Just as a sequence of images is set in motion inside a man as his
life comes to an end---unfolding the views of himself under which he
has encountered himself without being aware of it---suddenly in his
expressions and looks the unforgettable emerges and imparts to
everything that concerned him that authority which even the poorest
wretch in dying possesses for the living around him. This authority
is at the very source of the story.

Death is the sanction of everything that the storyteller can tell. He
has borrowed his authority from death.


\[\[I love this essay, although it doesn\'t address what seems to me
to be a distortion in the general view of the narrative process:
story**telling**. In addition to the story which is told, there is
the story withheld. Attraction, narrative suspense, emanates from the
latter. The story withheld has its own (buried) structure and
tension. The reader marries the hidden story, not the visible one.
That is why we continue to read a story that inspires dread. An
attachment has been formed---surreptitiously. It operates like a
craving, which is how I recognize Benjamin\'s reference to death. The
craving for the unknown, as it is held by the act of storytelling,
points to death (or its substitute, the body). (Roy)\]\]


## Excerpts from \"Fame,\" by Robert Gluck[^ii]

There are contradictory reasons when I use \"real\" people in my
work, and the contradictions comfort me. Any literary practice
should, I think, derive from contradictory sources and motives\... I
name names to evoke the already-known, to make writing co-extend with
the world and history, and to examine the fiction of personality, as
well as the fiction of the word\.... I propose self-community-story
as a tonic for the loss of human scale; by naming
self-community-story I participate in their disintegration, their
progress from invisibility to something to be named and
manipulated---to be reintegrated later in a new context, in a third
term that history must provide.

Prolonged scrutiny can become an expenditure of self, a potlatch of
self. I\'ve come to experience the unreeling of interiority and
sexual disclosure as such a loss, and also part of a historical
trajectory. It\'s a writing activity that privileges the aggression
of naming---an ongoing colonization of self into one\'s own language.
Once something is named, you are in relation to it. Name the disease
to cure it.

We want to see a story as we see other representations: being hiding
behind appearance---that is, hiding and revealing the body. But the
use of real names \[in my work\] reorders connections and
disjunctions. I do mean fragmentation. I don\'t want to make the
predictable distinction between story and fragmented writing. Naming
names creates an open form that co-extends with the world. In a
postmodern switch, it applies the open form of modernism to content
by putting quote marks around the entire story, turning the story
into a fragment, an example of a story. The story floats---as gossip
does---between the lives of the people who are its characters, and
the lives of its readers (in that thorny field of reader/writer
dynamics). The problem of figure and ground becomes a social one, and
some of what is existential in the content is subtracted and
reintegrated in the relation between reader and writer.

\... Using real names provides a relation between the writer and
myself that carries some risk, like performance art. What I witness
is always the same: any story hides and then reveals the body.


\[\[Two aspects of narrative writing have been subjected to
devastating critiques: the linearity of narrative, and the
credibility of the narrator. (The popularity of the memoir is in part
due to the diminished credibility of anything other than an
autobiographical voice.) The critical and political forces which
produced these critiques have pushed experimental narrative writers
to the boundary where form collapses into experience. The searching
re-examination of narrative premises becomes part of the practice.
(Roy)\]\]


## Excerpts from \"Paragraphs Blowing On A Line,\" by Gail Scott[^iii]

### Entry 11:

She sees the present as a great tear, a great rip in the surface of
things: the gap of which is at first impossible for her to move
across (*\...does not thinking seek forever to clamp a dressing over
the gaping and violent wound of the impossibility of
thought\...[^vi] It is awareness of this that
makes linear narrative impossible. A virtually tragic awareness, for
the writing \"I,\" which modernists began to \"deconstruct\" as they
recognized that gap (accepted to give up power) has, in her case,
been \"deconstructed\" a priori by social conditions. She is not only
split between the self and the \"real\", but also within the
self\...

So the question becomes how to write across the almost \...
hysterical \... overdetermination of her gaps\...

Maybe my resistance to the narrative conventions of the novel have to
do with what I think of as its Protestant qualities: its earnest
representation of the \"real,\" its greed for action, its preference
for the concrete over the philosophical.

A compromise might be possible: structuring the story by means of the
fluctuations in her \... (dare I?) hysterical voice. The use of the
voice invoking a poetic meaning in excess of the sentence\....

Blows: violent and unusual interruptions in her narrative
texture-which texture the writing is hopefully starting to discover.
More and more I intuit that it has to do with starting from a
negative point: a crushed ego that doesn\'t see its boundaries.

### Entry 25

During this whole process I have been caught between the need to
accomplish this thing, which is both to posit some new kind of
subject and to have the sense of being a subject myself; and yet to
resist repeating, by creating a \"feminist narrative,\" what Barthes
calls \... the staging of a new \"father,\" a new hierarchy of
acceptable concepts. (*Every narrative (every unveiling of the truth)
is a staging of the \... father.*) Maybe what my heroine discovers in
trying to write her novel is only that the novel doesn\'t suit the
(diffuse?) women\'s way of seeing things. Where there is closure
(firm conclusions) in \"straight writing\" there are spaces,
questions in hers. Even her anecdotes point to other possible
representations, leave themselves open for reader intervention.

Still, given that my firm and conscious intention has been to counter
(patriarchal) ideology in this process, the poststructuralist recipe
for taking apart everything from the sentence to the author won\'t
entirely do. Presumably I have to at least propose some other
direction: language slips all around us. One\'s response to that is a
question of the relationship between writing (what it comprises of
consciousness) and body. Again to quote Barthes: *The text needs its
shadow. This shadow is a* bit *of ideology, a* bit *of
representation, a* bit *of subject: ghosts, pockets, traces,
necessary clouds. Subversion must produce its own chiaroscuro.*

\[\[It is generally true that reviews of experimental narrative do
not have a critical vocabulary for what the writer is doing. The goal
seems to be attaching a label to the content without \"giving it
away\". Narrative practice, as a field of critical inquiry, is in a
practically fetal state. Theory borrowed from poetics is not adequate
for describing or investigating how narratives work, what is at stake
in narrative, the social field narratives both operate within and set
up. The interventions into the social field which experimental
narratives perform are usually in practice imperceptible,
indistinguishable from background noise, unless the critical piece is
written by the writer herself. If narrative writers want the deepest
issues in their work to be visible, they must supply the critical
ideas that drive their practice. This journal will hopefully be a
place that supports the development of that discussion. (Roy)\]\]


## Excerpts from \"Interview with Carla Harryman,\" by Chris Tysh[^iv]

Tysh: \"The I expands,\" you wrote in \"Realism.\" In this age of
decentered subjectivities, how do you deploy the narrative machinery
of the \"I\" and the various sensibilities it is associated with?
Could you discuss the techniques with which you defamiliarize your
use of the first-person pronoun and in general address the issue of
the speaking subject in your prose. Who speaks?

Harryman: My answer to this question is complex and leads to
difficulties because I associate the I with power, control,
destruction, gender, and whatever might transpire or exhibit itself
between the poles of animation and passivity. Mine is an unwieldy set
of interests, less easy to organize into the kinds of discussion that
the problems of \"confession\" or \"authenticity\" lend themselves
to; even so, as you will see, I am concerned with the relation of the
\"self\" to the limits of knowledge.

When I think about the I, what first comes to mind is omniscience in
novels. (My understanding of literary device and the problem of
authorship comes as much from reading novels as poetry. ) I will use
Balzac as an example, because he has come up in my writing from time
to time. Balzac wanted to account for all the history of France as it
related to the ruptures of the bourgeois revolution. The expanding I
here would be Balzac-as-author-of-France, i.e., Balzac as authorial
agent/persona, rather than a deployment within the narrative text,
which in Balzac is driven by third-person narration. I am interested
in uncovering the hidden, expansive I. What happens when one
concretizes it, making it evident in the writing, is carnivalesque.
My writing parades various self-conscious positions in regard to
constructs such as authorship, omniscience, and agency. It chooses to
reflect upon the positions it takes and the relations it draws\...

The deployment of the I through the autobiographical, the fictive,
abstraction, argumentation is involved in the breaking up of unities.
The I, as I think you are suggesting, does not expand but disperses.
If the text is the social body, the I is mobile within it. If I is
that which is not the body, it attempts to identify with the body\'s
fleshiness. The I can be a code for seeking pleasure and examining
freedom. Then it becomes troubled by its demands, for the relation of
the self to the world is always troubling; it is never adequate and
the I in its freedom is too willing to give up civility, a cherished
element of comedy.

[^i]: Benjamin, Walter. **Illuminations**. (Shocken Books, © 1968).

[^ii]: Glück, Robert. \"Fame.\" **Poetics Journal**, Number 10, June 1998.

[^iii]: Scott, Gail. **Spaces Like Stairs: Essays by Gail Scott**. (Toronto, Ontario: The Women\'s Press, ©1989). Gail adds: "This diary was written over the years I worked on my novel, _Heroine_."

[^iv]: Carla Harryman. \"Interview by Chris Tysh.\" Number 10, June 1998.

[^vi]: Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, Translator\'s Preface to
Jacques Derrida, On Grammatology (Johns Hopkins University Press,
1976).

## Quotes from Gail Scott

### From *Eros The Bittersweet*, by Anne Carson

\"...Whenever passion seems within reach, *aidos* falls like a
veil.... This *aidos* is the archaic ethic of \'shamefastness\'. .
. . Ahprodite is the divinity in charge of the perversities of
*aidos* within the novel. She is the chief designer and chief
subverter of the story\'s changing triangles, both patron and enemy,
inspiring with a passion strong enough to resist all the temptations
that she herself proceeds to hurl against it.... Aphrodite\'s role
in novels is an ambivalent, not to say paradoxical, one like the role
of Eros in archaic poetry.\" Eros, p. 79-80

\[Carson\'s Greeks lined up Eros versus \'shamefastness,\' which I
contemporaneously interpret not as \'chastity\' but as \'cover-up\';
class has entered discourse: shame is private and social (Scott)\]


### From *The Shell and the Kernel* (Vol. 1) by Nicholas Abraham and Maria Torok

...What haunts are not the dead, but the gaps left within us by
the secrets of others...
...It is reasonable to maintain that the \'phantom effect\'
progressively fades during its transmission from one generation to
the next and that, finally, it disappears. Yet, this is not at all
the case when shared or complementary phantoms find a way of being
established as social practices along the lines of *staged words*... 
To stage a word, whether metaphorically, as an alloseme, or as a
cryptonym-constitutes an attempt at exorcism, an attempt, that is, to
relieve the unconscious by placing the effects of the phantom in the
social realm.
...The phantom\'s periodic and compulsive return lies beyond the
scope of symptom formation in the sense of a return of the repressed;
it works like a ventriloquist, like a stranger within the subject\'s
own mental topography. The imaginings issuing from the presence of a
stranger have nothing to do with fantasy strictly speaking. They
neither preserve a topgraphical status quo nor announce a shift in
it. Instead, by their gratuitousness in relation to the subject, they
create the impression of surrealistic flights of fancy or of
oulipo-like verbal feats.

\[I like to think of the phantom dressed up in a cloak studded with
the latest consumer items, on his way to the zoo. I like the play
between contiguity and disjunction implied by attempting to converse
with the unspeakable. This makes strange sentences that swing
\"both\" ways, dialoguing with both the uncanny and the social: a
rhetorical edge is added to poetic thinking. (Scott)\]

### From *Zoo or Letters Not About Love* by Viktor Shklovsky

...She loved me like her own daughter. When I was two months old,
she fed me cabbage soups and once she managed to poison me by gorging
herself on the pits from the cherry preserves that were being made at
our summer cottage. When I grew up, she came to see me, always with
presents; she remained standing and spoke to me in the formal way;
then, when everyone left, she sat down to drink tea with me and used
the familiar form . When I became an adult, I began to understand her
cheerful disposition: \'My mistress lives with another woman; it\'s
beyond me-just like nuns!\' And she\'d roar with laughter\--...She
had a special smell, like her wooden trunk when she lifted the lid:
calico and apples. A tlted nose, knowing eyes...
\"One time she was working in a very rich household. The house was
robbed...
Papa asked her: \'And where were you when the house was robbed?\'
\'At the Novo-Devichy Convent visiting a nun.\'
\'Well, then, tell them and they\'ll let you go.\'
\'What? And get a nun mixed up in such business, master!\'
So she didn\'t say a word, but sat in prison until the thieves were
found and she was released.
Then, after the revolution, Mama tried to persuade her to go vote,
but she said that after that business with the silver spoons, she
wouldn\'t go near the police station for love or money.

\[This passage, though \"authored\" by Sklovsky, is actually by Elsa
Triolet, Shklovsky\'s beloved at the time. He integrated her letters
into his own fiction. I had intended to quote Shklovsky; whose manner
of stringing together seemingly cut-up prose lines to effect
narrative \'continuity\' is exemplary. Not only shame, but also
authorship, get partly buried here. (Scott)\]


### From Lyn Hejinian\'s Introduction to Jena Osman\'s *Character*

Performance requires the person who is the actor (i.e. already a
character) to be in character, and this, in turn, cannot occur
without performance. This produces not a tautology (\"performance
requires performance\") but a bifurcation-character occurring as a
performance in and of itself; or, as Osman says (in \"The Figural
Cabinet\"), \"the taking place is double.\"
Such double-mindedness, which is to say this \'self\'conscious, is
central to Brechtian theater; it forms the basis on which alterities
can come into (the) play. It is characteristic, too, of everyone who
is forced into identity-consciousness, as W.E.B. Du Bois pointed out
long ago in The Souls of Black Folk, a work which itself has been
described (by Houston Baker) as a \"cultural performance.\" More
recently, the notion that \"identity\" is itself performative has
been greatly elaborated by theorists such as Judith Butler.
Identity-the sense of difference that belongs to one\'s
self-sameness-is itself \"character,\" something that \"takes
place.\" This means both that it is an occurrence or event-it
happens-and that it involves taking up a position among others (as
might be indicated by stage directions: *Enter Woman, wearing a hat,*
etc.)


### From \"Not All Halfbreed Mothers\" in *I Knew Two Métis Women*, by Greg Scofield

| Not all halfbreed mothers
| wear cowboy shirts or hats,
| flowers behind their ears or
| moccasins sent from up north.

| Not all halfbreed mothers
| read *The Star*, *The Enquirer*,
| *The Tibetan Book of the Dead*
| or Edgar Cayce,
| know the Lady of Shalott
| like she was a best friend
| or sister.

...

| Not all halfbreed mothers
| speak like a dictionary
| or Cree hymn book,

...

| Not all halfbreed mothers

| drink

| red rose, blue ribbon,
| Kelowna Red, Labatt\'s Blue.

## Quotes from Mary Burger

### From *Tristram Shandy*, by Laurence Sterne, first published 1760

#### Chapter V

On the fifth day of November, 1718, which to the era fixed on was as
near nine calendar months as any husband could in reason have
expected, --- was I, Tristram Shandy, Gentleman, brought forth into
this scurvy and disastrous world of ours. --- I wish I had been born
on the Moon, or in any of the planets (except Jupiter or Saturn,
because I never could bear cold weather), for it could not well have
fared worse with me in any of them (though I will not answer for
Venus) than it has in this vile, dirty planet of ours, --- which o\'
my conscience, with reverence be it spoken, I take to be made up of
the shreds and clippings of the rest; --- not but the planet is well
enough, provided a man could be born in it to a great title or to a
great estate; or could anyhow contrive to be called up to public
charges, and employments of dignity or power; --- but that is not my
case; --- and therefore every man will speak of the fair as his own
market has gone in it; --- for which cause I affirm it over again to
be one of the vilest worlds that ever was made; --- for I can truly
say that from the first hour I drew my breath in it, to this, that I
can now scarce draw it at all, for an asthma I got in skating against
the wind in Flanders, --- I have been the continual sport of what the
world calls fortune; and though I will not wrong her by saying, She
has ever made me feel the weight of any great or signal evil; --- yet
with all the good temper in the world, I affirm it of her that in
every stage of my life, and at every turn and corner where she could
get fairly at me, the ungracious Duchess has pelted me with a set of
as pitiful misadventures and cross accidents as ever small Hero
sustained.


#### Chapter VI

In the beginning of the last chapter, I informed you exactly *when* I
was born; --- but I did not inform you *how*. *No*; that particular
was reserved entirely for a chapter by itself; --- besides, Sir, as
you and I are in a manner perfect strangers to each other, it would
not have been proper to have let you into to many circumstances
relating to myself all at once. --- You must have a little patience.
I have undertaken, you see, to write not only my life, but my
opinions also; hoping and expecting that your knowledge of my
character, and of what kind of a mortal I am, by the one, would give
you a better relish for the other: As you proceed further with me,
the slight acquaintance which is now beginning betwixt us will grow
into familiarity; and that, unless one of us is in fault, will
terminate in friendship. --- *O diem praeclarum!* --- then nothing
which has touched me will be thought trifling in its nature, or
tedious in its telling. Therefore, my dear friend and companion, if
you should think me somewhat sparing of my narrative on my first
setting out, --- bear with me, --- and let me go on, and tell my
story my own way: --- or if I should seem now and then to trifle upon
the road, --- or should sometimes put on a fool\'s cap with a bell to
it, for a moment or two as we pass along, --- don\'t fly off, --- but
rather courteously give me credit for a little more wisdom than
appears upon my outside; --- and as we jog on, either laugh with me,
or at me, or in short, do anything, --- only keep your temper.


### From *The Confessions of Saint Augustine*, Trans Edward B. Pusey, D.D. First published c. 400 A.D.

Afterwards I began to smile; first in sleep, then waking: for so it
was told me of myself, and I believed it; for we see the like in
other infants, though of myself I remember it not. Thus, little by
little, I became conscious where I was; and to have a wish to express
my wishes to those who could content them, and I could not; for the
wishes were within me, and they without; nor could they be any sense
of theirs enter within my spirit. So I flung about at random limbs
and voice, making the few signs I could, and such as I could, like,
though in truth very little like, what I wished. And when I was not
presently obeyed (my wishes being hurtful or unintelligible), then I
was indignant with my elders for not submitting to me, with those
owing me no service, for not serving me; and avenged myself on them
by tears. Such have I learnt infants to be from observing them; and
that I was myself such, they, all unconscious, have shown me better
than my nurses who knew it.

Passing hence from infancy, I came to boyhood, or rather it came to
me, displacing infancy. Now did that depart, --- (for wither went
it?) --- and yet it was no more. For I was no longer a speechless
infant, but a speaking boy. This I remember; and have since observed
how I learned to speak. It was not that my elders taught me words
(as, soon after, other learning) in any set method; but I, longing by
cries and broken accents and various motions of my limbs to express
my thoughts, that so I might have my will, and yet unable to express
all I willed, or to whom I willed, did myself, by the understanding
which Thou, my God, gavest me, practice the sounds in my memory. When
they named any thing, and as they spoke turned towards it, I saw and
remembered that they called what they would point out by the name
they uttered. And that they meant this thing and no other was plain
from the motion of their body, the natural language, as it were, of
all nations, expressed by the countenance, glances of the eye,
gestures of the limbs, and tones of the voice, indicating the
affections of the mind, as it pursues, possesses, rejects, or shuns.
And thus by constantly hearing words, as they occurred in various
sentences, I collected gradually for what they stood; and having
broken in my mouth to these signs, I thereby gave utterance to my
will. Thus I exchanged with those about me these current signs of our
wills, and so launched deeper into the stormy intercourse of human
life, yet depending on parental authority and the beck of elders.

### From *Our Lady of the Flowers*, by Jean Genet, Trans. Bernard Frechtman,
First published 1943

Our Lady of the Flowers, still and already wearing the light, baggy,
youthful, preposterously tin and, in a word, ghostlike gray-flannel
suit that he was wearing the day of the crime and that he will be
wearing the day of his death, came there to buy a ticket for Le
Havre. Just as he got to the platform, he dropped his wallet which
was stiff with the twenty thousand franc notes. He felt it slip from
his pocket and turned around just in time to see it being picked up
by Darling. Calmly and fatally, Darling examined it, for though he
was a genuine crook, nevertheless he did not know how to be at ease
in original postures and imitated the gangsters of Chicago and
Marseilles. This simple observation also enables us to indicate the
importance of dreaming in the life of the hoodlum, but what I want
particularly to show you by means of it is that I shall surround
myself only with roughnecks of undistinguished personality, with none
of the nobility that comes from heroism. My loved ones will be those
whom you would call \"hoodlums of the worst sort.\"

Darling counted the bills. He took ten for himself, put them into his
pocket and handed the rest to Our Lady, who stood there dumbfounded.
They became friends.

I leave you free to imagine any dialogue you please. Choose whatever
may charm you. Have it, if you like, that they hear the voice of the
blood, or that they fall in love at first sight, or that Darling, by
indisputable signs invisible to the vulgar eye, betrays the fact that
he is a thief\...Conceive the wildest improbabilities. Have it that
the depths of their being are thrilled at accosting each other in
slang. Tangle them suddenly in a swift embrace or a brotherly kiss.
Do whatever you like.

### From, *Spacetime, Geometry, Cosmology*, William L. Burke, University Science Books, Mill Valley, 1980.


What does it mean to make a model of the universe? We must ask such
questions, even though they seem to belong in the realm of
philosophy, because of the fundamental nature of the subject itself.
A good analogy for this model making is the construction of a map of
a city. The city and the map of the city are two distinct things that
no one would confuse. This confusion is harder to avoid in cosmology.
To be useful, the map must be faithful to some of the city\'s
interesting properties. Furthermore, the map is constructed according
to some specific conventions: major roads are in red; north is at the
top; and so on. Also, a map does not try to define what a road is.
That you learn by demonstration. People point out roads and non-roads
to you, and you acquire the idea of a road by induction. Such basic
ideas, which are not defined but are learned by demonstration, are
called *primitive notions*.

The same things will be true of the models of physical reality that
we make. We will construct a map of the world according to some
specific but arbitrary conventions. The image is constructed not on
paper, but in terms of some mathematical structure, such as a linear
vector space. Because we can talk about physical reality only in
terms of some model, it is easy for us to forget the distinction
between the object itself and our model of the object. As in our map
of the city, there are some undefined elements in our model. For
spacetime, these primitive notions are *event, free particle, clock,*
and *light signal.* We will describe in words what these correspond
to, much as a roadmap might discuss what it does in fact consider to
be an acceptable road.

An important feature of any model is *coarse-graining.* The model
ignores a lot of things. The exact width, surface, and color of a
road cannot be deduced from the ordinary roadmap. In fact, the
roadmap is more useful than a photograph precisely because it omits
such irrelevant detail. Similarly, there is a coarse-graining in our
primitive notions for spacetime. For example, we will not describe a
clock by making a detailed model of its internal construction. Such
details will not be mentioned. The model presumes that they are
irrelevant, and it is the task of experiment to verify this.


### From *The Passion*, Jeanette Winterson, Vintage Books, 1989

Lovers are not at their best when it matters. Mouths dry up, palms
sweat, conversation flags and all the time the heart is threatening
to fly from the body once and for all. Lovers have been known to have
heart attacks. Lovers drink too much from nervousness and cannot
perform. They eat too little and faint during their fervently wished
consummation. They do not stroke the favoured cat and their
face-paint comes loose. This is not all. Whatever you have set store
by, your dress, your dinner, your poetry, will go wrong.

How is it that one day life is orderly and you are content, a little
cynical perhaps but on the whole just so, and then without warning
you find the solid floor is a trapdoor and you are now in another
place whose geography is uncertain and whose customs are strange.

Travellers at least have a choice. Those who set sail know that
things will not be the same as at home. Explorers are prepared. But
for us, who travel along the blood vessels, who come to the cities of
the interior by chance, there is no preparation. We who were fluent
find life is a foreign language. Somewhere between the swamp and the
mountains. Somewhere between fear and sex. Somewhere between God and
the Devil passion is and the way there is sudden and the way back is
worse.

I\'m surprised at myself for talking in this way. I\'m young, the
world is before me, there will be others. I feel my first streak of
defiance since I met her. My first upsurge of self. I won\'t see her
again. I can go home, throw aside these clothes and move on. I can
move out if I like. I\'m sure the meat man can be persuaded to take
me to Paris for a favour or two.

> Passion, I spit on it.
>
> I spat into the canal.

