
# Cory Frost: It's Bits World


Â 


## Working Notes

**The primary idea here** is that we have to forget where ideas come
from in order to find them interesting again. Non-English-speaking
poets of English will take a text-could be a phone book, could be a
love letter, could be the instruction manual for a pocket
fisherman-and create astonishing juxtapositions which in turn create
narrative fireworks in the mind of an ordinary, pre-programmed
English-speaking reader like me. \"A comfortable twig for the heroine
in the town. I feel more refreshed than anyone. My daughter has
arrived at puberty.\" Their ability to do this rests on their
inability to remember or even understand the original context.

When the pervasive, mass-produced poetry of (culturally and
economically Imperialist) jingles, slogans, and catchphrases is read
through a filter of foreign-ness-either cultural or linguistic-what
results is something infinitely more imaginative and disruptive.
These mutant words and phrases are the visible residues of desire, in
that they are produced by the conjunction of the foreign-language
longing for the power of English, and the longing of the
English-speaking reader for the novelty of otherness. The name \"Bits
World\" is derived from the name of a Japanese stationery brand,
\"Bits Goods\": notebooks bearing slogans such as \"I\'m an useful
and enjoyable stationery. Let\'s get along with me!\" The name also
describes the writing/performance techniques I\'ve been experimenting
with. (I sometimes use the more academic-sounding moniker \"discourse
collage.\")

In performance, this piece is accompanied by travel slides collected
from second-hand shops: pictures of famous landmarks (Saint Basil\'s
Cathedral in Moscow), not so famous landmarks (anonymous obelisks on
the side of the highway), people at the beach, road signs in various
languages. There\'s a shot of a wooden Santa Claus cut-out surrounded
by palm trees, shots taken from buses and trains, shots of totem
poles and castles and flamingoes: typical scenes from the great
20th-Century-Enlightenment project of Tourism. The slides emphasize
with irony that this is not a travelogue or a visit to a picturesque
alterity: the piece attempts rather to remove the distance from
travel, thereby making the exotic obsolete. But the slides are also
meant to distract the audience long enough to make them think they
are listening to a story. Which, I admit, despite the disparate
origins of and inspirations for these sentences, they are.

-------------------------------------------------------------------

They were looking for a total transformation of mundane experience
into bliss. It had become necessary. The winter came fast and hard,
and it stayed a long time. The potatoes froze in the ground, there
was not enough wood for the stove, and the modem was too slow. There
was a war, and people were being asked to recycle aluminum. It was
the off-season. I am so sleepy right now, but I\'ll tell you
something: you should regard every anomaly as an opportunity to be
awestruck.

When she was a small child she found a dead pigeon beside the
railroad tracks, and later in the same place she found a dead
calculator. Her friend went to the hospital. His cornea was wrinkled
and it was making his eyelids stick together. It was the off-season.
He closed up the shop and went out in search of a sandwich and a
malted milk. \"Oh God damn it for Christ\'s sake,\" he said. Love.
What was this thing that so many poets made such a fuss about? When
they first met, they stayed indoors all the time. He was agoraphobic
and she was afraid to be alone.

In those days everyone had a story to tell. Losing a toe to frostbite
or getting one\'s head stuck in a milk can. Outside, the streets were
dirty and cold. They needed distraction. They wanted to see
everything, so they would be distracted from everything else. He is a
man in fine fettle. He possesses a generous spirit, and she has nice
manners. She knew when she got up that morning it would not be an
ordinary day. They took a lot of things with them: it was not the
things they were trying to escape so much as the origins of things.
They had to forget where ideas came from in order to find them
interesting again. She justified the trip as \"radical chemotherapy
for my cancerous soul.\"

All the hotels were filled with celebrities they didn\'t know. People
were eating their dinners alone in restaurants. The mountains were
dream-like and seemed smaller than she had imagined. On the side of
the highway there were farmers selling Kool-aid. The amusement park
employees were not amused. Of all the rides, the bus back to the city
was the one they liked most. There was a restaurant that served
nothing but insects, and another one that served only tofu. \"Can you
drive a standard?\" he asked. They drove a Chevy to the levee and
drove a Ford to the fjord. They tried to make themselves more
interesting by being interested in more things. Some of the maps had
to be stretched to make them fit. \"You can\'t get there from here,\"
he said. \"It seems like I can\'t even get here from here,\" she
replied.

Everywhere they went, the souvenirs had been made somewhere else.
\"There are so many beautiful places in the world,\" she said. \"But
they are so disorganized.\" They couldn\'t picture themselves in any
tragic news reports, so when the boat was overcrowded and barely out
of the water, they didn\'t complain. The hotel room was exactly six
feet long by three feet wide by three feet high, and it had a TV. Oh,
I\'m so drowsy. What should we do? Let\'s go for a stroll by the
river, for a change of pace. Do you want to see a movie? It seems
silly to go to a movie theatre. They called home and left messages
for themselves. When they found an internet caf they digitized
postcards and emailed them to friends. Tourism is the greatest gift
of the twentieth century, they thought. \"The reason I\'m always
having fun,\" she said, \"is that I\'m doing what I like. I\'m the
happiest loser alive,\" she said. \"My specialty is nonchalance,\" he
said.

Ten miles out of the city they saw the most amazing sight they had
ever seen. A lifetime of unspoken, unconscious supplication was
finally rewarded. They were late getting back to the train station
and the train was already beginning to pull away. They called out for
it to stop so they could get on. The conductor said, do you have
tickets? Who are you? New man, new woman, feeling lucky to be somehow
caught up in this tedious, cruel, and inexplicable existence. New
woman, new man, carrying an old suitcase with 30 lbs of brandy-filled
chocolates and no spare underwear. Reading books upside-down and
backwards. Losing our wallets with a sense of purpose. Sleeping with
our eyes open. Haggling over hagiography, canonizing cartoon
characters. Boxing with St.Goofy. Paying for dinner with underarm
deodorant. Leaving a trail of discarded punctuation marks. Taking out
insurance and releasing it into the wild. Fucking on the carpet,
between the seats. I am a gentle philosopher of the road, he
proclaimed. I am the zeitgeist multiplied by a weltschmerz, she
declared. New man and new woman, picking up the pieces and moving on,
except sideways this time.

They played Scrabble in the observation car, by moonlight, with
blankets around them and strangers sleeping in the corners. They
passed a frozen waterfall. They found a newspaper and discovered that
there had been an election while they were gone. The war had moved on
to a different part of the world. The stars fizzled and went out. The
leaves were vivid in a way that made them feel light-headed. Sunrise
above the clouds doesn\'t compare with this, he admitted. \"It\'s
so\... ineffable!\" she exclaimed. \"That exclamation mark,\" he
said, \"that exclamation mark is the last exclamation mark you\'ll
ever need.\"

Two people are travelling on a train. Watching tiny villages and
fields go by, having sex in the washroom. \"It\'s bits world,\" she
says. It\'s bits world. Let\'s get along with me. I am an edifying
and enjoyable text-based performance artist, and this is most
comfortable performance you have ever run into. Wherever you may be,
whoever you are, when you think of usefulness, think of Bits.


