
# Jacques Debrot: Narrative is boring



**Narrative is boring** because it precludes the direct actualization of
the world through our perception. But there is no alternative;
narrative is both a disabling and a necessary condition of perception.
For this reason, boredom is the affective condition that writing
predominantly negotiates and exploits. However, it has always struck
me that boredom, despite its stigmatization, is, in reality, a
complexly ambivalent emotion. Somewhere Roland Barthes--in **Roland
Barthes** I believe---describes boredom, suggestively, as a form
hysteria (or is it stupidity that he calls hysterical?). Whatever the
case, I try to make my writing both as boring and as stupid as I
possibly can---in Barthes' words, "I agree to pluralize myself, to
permit free cantons of stupidity to live inside me." Error, play, bad
taste, incomprehension, artifice, and a lack of truth or
reasonableness are, thus, the narrative potentialities I attempt to
fulfill.

Paradoxically, with the loss of narrative's legitimizing and
explanatory functions, in much of the most interesting contemporary
writing there has been an increasing recourse to, rather than a
retreat from, narrative forms. My own work is transversed by multiple,
parataxic narratives and entangled discourses. Ideally (and
impossibly) I would like to produce a narrative that would need to be
read in the same way one "reads" a painting; that is, by orienting
oneself gradually, by means of various intensities and expressive
deformations of surface---the textual equivalents, if they exist, of
the mechanisms of collaging, dribbling, scraping, scratching,
scumbling, attaching, interposing, reversing, permutting, and so
on---to the entire environment and atmosphere of the writing; a method
aligned not so much with an aesthetics of fragmentation, but rather,
one that proceeds through the *accretion* and flux of many ephemeral
ruptures and stases.

This, obviously, entails a fundamental reconsideration of what is
traditionally classified as narrative form. However, for me, the
central question is not a taxanomical, or a typological one. More
important than the question of whether writing such as mine is
narrative, is the problem of how, in what sense, this writing can be
read as narrative.

The situation of communication---the roles of author and reader, the
relations of subject positions within the narrative itself, as well as
the historical contexts in which the meanings of the narrative
circulate---cannot be excluded from the kind of reading my work
attempts to invite. But even more specifically, I am interested by the
aesthetic situation in which my writing occurs. By this I mean I am
concerned most of all with my feelings, and with my tastes and my
preferences. Like everyone's, my experience of art, as Thierry du
Duve argues, "begins and ends with aesthetic judgement." It is
impossible---at least on aesthetic grounds---to be insincere to one's
tastes. However our preferences are not objective, and our feelings,
although they are our own, are also social constructions. Inasmuch as
literature and narrative are no longer given domains but generative
practices, what I want to experience in the act of writing, or reading
is to feel, as du Duve puts it, the conflict of values both within
myself, and within and for the cultural field as a conflict of
feelings, "to give in to the reflexive feeling of dissent. . . . To
give my consent to the felt absence of concensus."

It is this ongoing dissent--that is to say, my resistance to any
single unitary or consummating construction---that *is* the self from
which, as much as the goal toward which, I write.

 

 


