
# Robert Gl√ºck: Long Note on New Narrative





**To talk about** the beginnings of New Narrative, I have to talk about my
friendship with Bruce Boone. We met in the early seventies through the
San Francisco Art Institute's bulletin board: Ed and I wanted to move
and Bruce and Burton wanted to move---would we all be happy living
together? For some reason both couples dropped the idea and remained
in our respective flats for many years. But Bruce and I were poets and
our obsession with Frank O'Hara forged a bond.

I was twenty-three or twenty-four. Bruce was seven years older. He was
a wonderful teacher. He read to transform himself and to attain a
correct understanding. Such understanding was urgently political.

Bruce had his eye on the catastrophic future, an upheaval he predicted
with a certain grandeur, but it was my own present he helped me find.
I read and wrote to invoke what seemed impossible--relation
itself--in order to take part in a world that ceaselessly makes
itself up, to "wake up" to the world, to recognize the world, to be
convinced that the world exists, to take revenge on the world for not
existing.

To talk about New Narrative, I also have to talk about Language
Poetry, which was in its heroic period in the seventies. I treat
diverse poets as one unit, a sort of flying wedge, because that's how
we experienced them. It would be hard to overestimate the drama they
brought to a Bay Area scene that limped through the seventies, with
the powerful exception of feminist poets like Judy Grahn, and the
excitement generated by movement poetry. Language Poetry's Puritan
rigor, delight in technical vocabularies, and professionalism were new
to a generation of Bay Area poets whose influences included the Beats,
Robert Duncan and Jack Spicer, the New York School (Bolinas was its
western outpost), surrealism and psychedelic surrealism.

Suddenly people took sides, though at times these confrontations
resembled a pastiche of the embattled positions of earlier
avant-guards. Language Poetry seemed very "straight male"---though
what didn't? Barrett Watten's **Total Syntax**, for example,
brilliantly established (as it dispatched) a lineage of fathers:
Olson, Zukofsky, Pound, etc.

If I could have become a Language poet I would have; I craved the
formalist fireworks, a purity that invented its own tenets. On the
snowy mountain-top of progressive formalism, from the highest high
road of modernist achievement, there was plenty of contempt heaped on
less rigorous endeavor. I had come to a dead end in the mid-seventies
like the poetry scene itself. The problem was not theoretical---or it
was: I could not go on until I figured out some way to understand
where I was. I also craved the community the Language Poets made for
themselves.

The questions vexing Bruce and me and the kind of rigor we needed were
only partly addressed by Language Poetry which, in the most general
sense, we saw as an aesthetics built on an examination (by
subtraction: of voice, of continuity) of the ways language generates
meaning. The same could be said of other experimental work, especially
the minimalisms, but Language Poetry was our proximate example.

Warring camps and battle lines drawn between representation and
non-representation---retrospection makes the argument seem as
arbitrary as Fancy vs. Imagination. But certainly the "logic of
history" at that moment supported the idea of this division, along
with the struggle to find a third position that would encompass the
whole argument.

I experienced the poetry of disjunction as a luxurious idealism in
which the speaking subject rejects the confines of representation and
disappears in the largest freedom, that of language itself. My
attraction to this freedom and to the professionalism with which it
was purveyed made for a kind of class struggle within myself. Whole
areas of my experience, especially gay experience, were not admitted
to this utopia, partly because the mainstream reflected a resoundingly
coherent image of myself back to me---an image so unjust that it
amounted to a tyranny that I could not turn my back on. We had been
disastrously described by the mainstream---a naming whose most extreme
(though not uncommon) expression was physical violence. Political
agency involved at least a provisionally stable identity.

Meanwhile, gay identity was also in its heroic period---it had not yet
settled into just another nationalism and it was new enough to know
its own constructedness. In the urban mix, some great experiment was
actually taking place, a genuine community where strangers and
different classes and ethnicities rubbed more than shoulders. This
community was not destroyed by commodity culture, which was destroying
so many other communities; instead, it was founded in commodity
culture. We had to talk about it. Bruce and I turned to each other to
see if we could come up with a better representation---not in order to
satisfy movement pieties or to be political, but in order to be. We
(eventually we were gay, lesbian, and working class writers) could not
let narration go.

Since I'm confined to hindsight, I write as though Bruce and I were
following a plan instead of stumbling and groping toward a writing
that could join other literatures of the present. We could have found
narrative models in, say, Clark Coolidge's prose, so perhaps
narrative practice relates outward to the actual community whose story
is being told. We could have located self-reference and awareness of
artifice in, say, the novels of Ronald Firbank, but we didn't. So
again, our use of language that knows itself relates outward to a
community speaking to itself dissonantly.

We were fellow travelers of Language Poetry and the innovative
feminist poetry of that time, but our lives and reading lead us toward
a hybrid aesthetic, something impure. We (say, Bruce Boone, Camille
Roy, Kevin Killian, Dodie Bellamy, Mike Amnasan, myself and, to
include the dead, Steve Abbott and Sam D'Allesandro) are still fellow
travelers of the poetries that evolved since the early eighties, when
writers talked about "nonnarrative." One could untangle that knot
forever, or build an aesthetics on the ways language conveys silence,
chaos, undifferentiated existence, and erects countless horizons of
meaning.

How to be a theory-based writer?---one question. How to represent my
experience as a gay man?---another question just as pressing. These
questions lead to readers and communities almost completely ignorant
of each other. Too fragmented for a gay audience? Too much sex and
"voice" for a literary audience? I embodied these incommensurates so
I had to ask this question: How can I convey urgent social meanings
while opening or subverting the possibilities of meaning itself? That
question has deviled and vexed Bay Area writing for twenty-five years.
What kind of representation least deforms its subject? Can language be
aware of itself (as object, as system, as commodity, as abstraction)
yet take part in the forces that generate the present? Where in
writing does engagement become authentic? One response, the politics
of form, apparently does not answer the question completely.

One afternoon in 1976, Bruce remarked on the questions to the reader
I'd been throwing into poems and stories. They were self-consciously
theatrical and they seemed to him to pressure and even sometimes to
reverse the positions of reader and writer. Reader/writer dynamics
seemed like a way into the problems that preoccupied us, a toe in the
water!

From our poems and stories, Bruce abstracted text-metatext: a story
keeps a running commentary on itself from the present. The commentary,
taking the form of a meditation or a second story, supplies a
succession of frames. That is, the more you fragment a story, the more
it becomes an example of narration itself--narration displaying its
devices--while at the same time (as I wrote in 1981) the metatext
"asks questions, asks for critical response, makes claims on the
reader, elicits comments. In any case, text-metatext takes its form
from the dialectical cleft between real life and life as it wants to
be."[^1_gluck_1]

We did not want to break the back of representation or to "punish"
it for lying, but to elaborate narration on as many different planes
as we could, which seemed consistent with the lives we lead. Writing
can't will away power relations and commodity life; instead, writing
must accept its relation to power and recognize that at present group
practice resides inside the commodity. Bruce wrote, "When evaluating
image in American culture, isn't it a commodity whether anyone likes
it or not? You make your additions and subtractions from that point
on."[^1_gluck_2]

In 1978, Bruce and I launched the Black Star Series and published my
**Family Poems** and his **My Walk With Bob**, a lovely book.[^1_gluck_3] In
"Remarks on Narrative"---the afterword of **Family Poems**---Bruce
wrote, "As has now been apparent for some time, the poetry of the
'70s seems generally to have reached a point of stagnation,
increasing a kind of refinement of technique and available forms,
without yet being able to profit greatly from the vigor, energy and
accessibility that mark so much of the new Movement writing of gays,
women and Third World writers, among others. Ultimately this impasse
of poetry reflects conditions in society itself."[^1_gluck_4]

We appreciated the comedy of mounting an offensive ("A critique of
the new trends toward conceptualization, linguistic abstraction and
process poetry") with those slenderest volumes. My poems and stories
were set "in the family," not so antipsychological as they might
have been given that we assumed any blow to interiority was a step
forward for mankind.

We contended with the Language Poets while seeking their attention in
the forums they erected for themselves. We published articles in
**Poetics Journal** and **L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E**, and spoke in talk series
and forums---a mere trickle in the torrent of their critical work. If
Language Poetry was a dead end, what a fertile dead end it was!

New Narrative was in place by the time **Elements of a Coffee
Service** was published by Donald Allen's Four Season's Foundation
in 1982, and Hoddypole published Bruce's novel, **Century of Clouds**
in 1980. We were thinking about autobiography; by autobiography we
meant daydreams, nightdreams, the act of writing, the relationship to
the reader, the meeting of flesh and culture, the self as
collaboration, the self as disintegration, the gaps, inconsistences
and distortions, the enjambments of power, family, history and
language.

Bruce and I brought high and low together between the covers of a
book, mingling essay, lyric, and story. Our publishing reflected those
different modes: stories from **Elements** appeared in gay
anthologies, porn magazines, **Social Text**, and **Soup**. Bruce
wrote about Georges Bataille for **The Advocate***.
*
I wanted to write with a total continuity and total disjunction since
I experienced the world (and myself) as continuous and infinity
divided. That was my ambition for writing. Why should a work of
literature be organized by one pattern of engagement? Why should a
"position" be maintained regarding the size of the gaps between
units of meaning? To describe how the world is organized may be the
same as organizing the world. I wanted the pleasures and politics of
the fragment and the pleasures and politics of story, gossip, fable
and case history; the randomness of chance and a sense of
inevitability; sincerity while using appropriation and pastiche. When
Barrett Watten said about **Jack the Modernist**, "You have your cake
and eat it too," I took it as a great compliment, as if my intention
spoke through the book.

During the seventies, Bruce was working on his doctorate at UC
Berkeley. His dissertation was a structuralist and gay reading of
O'Hara, that is, O'Hara and community, a version of which was
published in the first issue of **Social Text** in 1979. He joined the
Marxism and Theory Group at St. Cloud which gave birth to that
journal. Bruce also wrote critical articles (especially tracking the
"gay band" of the Berkeley Renaissance).([^1_gluck_4]) Bruce introduced me to
most of the critics who would make a foundation for New Narrative
writing.


Here are a few of them:

Georg Lukacs: In **The Theory of the Novel**, Lukacs maintains that
the novel contains---that is, holds together---incommensurates. The
epic and novel are the community telling itself its story, a story
whose integration becomes increasingly hard to achieve. **The Theory
of the Novel** leads to ideas of collaboration and community that are
not naive, that is, to narrative that questions itself. It
redistributes relations of power and springs the writer from the box
of psychology, since he becomes the community speaking to itself. I
wrote "Caricature," a talk given at 80 Langton in 1983, mostly using
Lukacs' book, locating instances of conservative and progressive
communities speaking to themselves: "If the community is a given, so
are its types."

Louis Althusser: His essay, "Ideological State Apparatuses,"
refigures the concept of base/superstructure. Terry Eagleton rang the
following change on Althusser's bulky formula: Ideology is the
imaginary resolution of real contradictions. By 1980, literary
naturalism was easily deprived of its transparency, but this formula
also deprives all fantasy of transparency, including the fantasy of
personality. If making a personality is not different from making a
book, in both cases one could favor the "real contradictions" side
of the formula. If personality is a fiction (a political fiction!)
then it is a story in common with other stories---it occurs on the
same plane of experience. This "formula" sets those opacities---a
novel, a personality---as equals on the stage of history, and supports
a new version of autobiography in which "fact" and "fiction"
inter-penetrate.

Althusser comes with a lot of baggage. For example, he divided science
from ideology, and ideology from theory. Frankly, Bruce and I pillaged
critical theory for concepts that gave us access to our experience. In
retrospect, it might be better simply to "go with" cultural studies.
To the endless chain of equal cultural manifestations (a song by REM,
the Diet of Worms, Rousseau's **Confessions**), we add another equal
sign, attaching the self as yet another thing the culture "dreamed
up."

Georges Bataille: Bataille was central to our project. He finds a
counter-economy of rupture and excess that includes art, sex, war,
religious sacrifice, sports events, ruptured subjectivity, the
dissolution of bodily integuments---"expenditure" of all kinds.
Bataille showed us how a bath house and a church could fulfill the
same function in their respective communities.

In writing about sex, desire and the body, New Narrative approached
performance art, where self is put at risk by naming names, becoming
naked, making the irreversible happen---the book becomes social
practice that is lived. The theme of obsessive romance did double
duty, de-stabling the self and asserting gay experience. Steve Abbott
wrote, "Gay writers Bruce Boone and Robert Gl√ºck (like Acker, Dennis
Cooper or the subway graffitists again) up the ante on this factuality
by weaving their own names, and those of friends and lovers, into
their work. The writer/artist becomes exposed and vulnerable: you risk
being foolish, mean-spirited, wrong. But if the writer's life is more
open to judgement and speculation, so is the reader's." ([^1_gluck_6])

Did we believe in the "truth and freedom" of sex? Certainly we were
attracted to scandal and shame, where there is so much information. I
wanted to write close to the body---the place language goes
reluctantly. We used porn, where information saturates narrative, to
expose and manipulate genre's formulas and dramatis personae, to
arrive at ecstacy and loss of narration as the self sheds its social
identities. We wanted to speak about subject/master and object/slave.
Bataille showed us that loss of self and attainment of nothingness is
a group activity. He supplied the essential negative, a zero planted
in the midst of community. His concept of transgression gave us lots
of fuel, as did his novels of philosophic pornography.

Now I'd add that transgressive writing is not necessarily about sex
or the body---or about anything one can predict. There's no manual;
transgressive writing shocks by articulating the present, the one
thing impossible to put into words, because a language does not yet
exist to describe the present. Bruce translated Bataille's **Guilty**
for Lapis Press when I worked as an editor there. We hammered out the
manuscript together, absorbing Bataille gesturally.

Five more critics. Walter Benjamin: for lyrical melancholy (which
reads as autobiography) and for permission to mix high and low. V.N.
Voloshinov: for discovering that meaning resides within its social
situation, and that contending powers struggle within language itself.
Rolland Barthes: for a style that goes back to autobiography, for the
fragment, and for displaying the constructed nature of
story---"baring the device." Michel Foucault: for the constructed
nature of sexuality, the self as collaboration, and the
not-to-be-underestimated example of an out gay critic. (Once at 18th
and Castro, Michel pierced Bruce with his eagle gaze and Bruce was
overcome!---he says.) Julia Kristeva: for elaborating the meaning of
abjection in **Powers of Horror**.

Our interest in Dennis Cooper and Kathy Acker produced allegiances and
friendships with those writers. Kathy moved to San Francisco in the
fall of 1981; while getting settled she stayed with Denise Kastan, who
lived downstairs from me. Denise and I co-directed Small Press
Traffic. Kathy was at work on **Great Expectations**. In fact, Denise
and I appear in it; we are the whores Danella and Barbraella. Kathy's
writing gave Bruce, Steve Abbott and myself another model, evolved far
beyond our own efforts, for the interrogation of autobiography as
"text" perpetually subverted by another text. Appropriation puts in
question the place of the writer---in fact, it turns the writer into a
reader.

Meanwhile, Bruce and I were thinking about the painters who were
rediscovering the figure, like Eric Fischl and Julian Schnabel. They
found a figuration that had passed through the flame of abstract
expressionism and the subsequent isms, operating through them. It made
us feel we were part of a crosscultural impulse rather than a local
subset. Bruce wrote, "With much gay writing and some punk notoriously
(Acker the big example), the sexual roots of aggression come into
question. There's a scream of connection, the figure that emerges
ghostly: life attributed to those who have gone beyond. So in Dennis
Cooper's **Safe** there's a feeling-tone like a Schnabel
painting:the ground's these fragments of some past, the stag, the
Roman column, whatever---on them a figure that doesn't quite exist
but would maybe like to. The person/persona/thing the writer's trying
to construct from images---"([^1_gluck_7])

In 1976, I started volunteering in the non-profit bookstore Small
Press Traffic and became co-director not long after. From 1977 to
1985, I ran a reading series and held free walk-in writing workshops
at the store. The workshops became a kind of New Narrative laboratory
attended by Michael Amnasan, Steve Abbott, Sam D'Allesandro, Kevin
Killian, Dodie Bellamy, Camille Roy, and many other writers whose
works extend my own horizon. I would start by reading some piece of
writing that interested me: Chaucer, Robert Smithson, Lydia Davis,
Ivan Bunin, Jim Thompson, a book of London street games, Thomas Wyatt,
Sei Shonagon. We were aspiring to an ideal of learning derived as much
from Spicer and Duncan as from our contemporaries.

Most writers we knew were reading theory. Later, guided by Bruce, we
started a left reading group at Small Press Traffic, attended by Steve
Benson, Ron Silliman, Denise Kastan, Steve Abbott, Bruce, myself and
others. The personal demolished the political, and after a few months
we disbanded. From that era I recall Ron's epithet (which Bruce and I
thought delicious) *The Small Press Traffic School of Dissimulation*.

More successful was the Left/Write Conference we mounted in 1981 at
the Noe Valley Ministry. The idea for a conference was conceived in
the spring of 1998 by Bruce and Steve Abbott, who sent letters to
thirty writers of various ethnicities and aesthetic positions. Steve
was a tireless community builder, and Left/Write was an expression of
New Narrative's desire to bring communities together, a desire which
informed the reading series at Small Press Traffic, Steve Abbott's
**Soup** (where the term New Narrative first appeared), Michael
Amnasan's **Ottotole**, Camille Roy and Nayland Blake's **Dear
World**, Kevin Killian and Brian Monte's **No Apologies**, and later
Kevin and Dodie Bellamy's **Mirage**. We felt urgent about it,
perhaps because we each belonged to such disparate groups. To our
astonishment, three hundred people attended Left/Write, so we
accomplished on a civic stage what we were attempting in our writing,
editing and curating: to mix groups and modes of discourse. Writers
famous inside their own group and hardly known outside, like Judy
Grahn and Erica Hunt, spoke and read together for the first time.

Out of that conference the Left Writers Union emerged; soon it was
commandeered by its most unreconstructed faction which prioritized gay
and feminist issues out of existence. At one meeting, we were
instructed to hold readings in storefronts on ground level so the
"masses of San Francisco" could walk in!

During this decade--1975-1985--Bruce and I carried on what amounted
to one long gabby phone conversation. We brought gossip and anecdote
to our writing because they contain speaker and audience, establish
the parameters of community and trumpet their"unfair" points of
view. I hardly ever "made things up," a plot still seems exotic, but
as a collagist I had an infinite field. I could use the lives we
endlessly described to each other as "found material" which
complicates storytelling because the material also exists on the same
plane as the reader's life. Found materials have a kind of radiance,
the truth of the already-known.

In 1981 we published **La Fontaine** ** as a valentine to our
friendship. In one poem, Bruce (and Montaigne!) wrote, "In the
friendship whereof I speak...our souls mingle and blend in a fusion
so complete that the seam that joins them disappears and is found no
more. If pressed to say why I loved him I'd reply, because it was
him, because it was me."([^1_gluck_9])

In using the tag New Narrative, I concede there is such a thing. In
the past I was reluctant to promote a literary school that endured
even ten minutes, much less a few years. Bruce and I took the notion
of a "school" half seriously, and once New Narrative began to
resemble a program, we abandoned it, declining to recognize ourselves
in the tyrants and functionaries that make a literary school. Or was
it just a failure of nerve? Now I am glad to see the term used by
younger writers in San Francisco, writers in other cities, like Gail
Scott in Montreal, and critics like Earl Jackson, Jr., Antony
Easthope, Carolyn Dinshaw, and Dianne Chisholm. Bruce and I may have
been kidding about founding a school, but we were serious about
wanting to bring emotion and subject matter into the field of
innovative writing. I hope that these thoughts on our project---call
it what you will---are useful to those looking for ways to extending
the possibilities of poem and story without backtracking into the
mainstream, or into 19th-century transparency.




[^1_gluck_1]: Robert Gluck, "Caricature," **Soup: New Critical Perspectives** #4, ed. Bruce Boone (San Francisco, 1985), 28.

[^1_gluck_2]: Bruce Boone, "A Narrative Like a Punk Picture: Shocking Pinks,
Lavenders, Magentas, Sickly Greens," **Poetics Journal** #5 ed.
Barrett Watten and Lyn Hejinian, (Berkeley, May 1985) 92.

[^1_gluck_3]: Black Star published **He Cried** by Dennis Cooper and **Lives of the Poets** by Steve Abbott. The Black Star Series still publishes,
most recently Camille Roy's **Swarm**, and soon John Norton's
**Re:marriage**.

[^1_gluck_4]: Bruce Boone, "Remarks on Narrative," afterward of **Family
Poems** by Robert Gluck, Black Star Series, San Francisco, 1979) 29.

[^1_gluck_5]: "Spicer's Writing in Context," **Ironwood** 28, Tuscon, 1986.
"Robert Duncan & Gay Community," **Ironwood** 22, (Robert Duncan
Special Issue, Tuscon 1983. Bruce's studies have led him to eastern
religion---now he's a non-denominational minister specializing in
caring for people who are terminally ill.

[^1_gluck_6]: Gluck, "Caricature," 19.

[^1_gluck_7]: Steve Abbott, "Notes on Boundaries, New Narrative," **Soup: New Critical Perspectives** #4) 81.

[^1_gluck_8]: Boone, "A Narrative Like a Punk Picture," **Poetics Journal**
#5, 92.

[^1_gluck_9]: La Fontaine, "Perukes" (Black Star Series, 1981) 63.







¬†

¬†


