
# Eileen Myles: Long and Social



 


**My book** (*Cool for You*[^2_myles_note1]) is absolutely an
extension of my poetry practice, I've even come to refer to it and
maybe the class of novels it's a member of as the poet\'s novel.
Having written a novel I don't have to protect myself from the
disparaging term poet--yet I\'m more clearly a poet than ever. I
mean a poem is an extravagant grandiose and trembling form, for
better or worse always alive, I think, and I've brought those
weaknesses and virtues into novel writing and I'm dying to do it
again. As a younger poet I was urged (in order to be important) to
think large, to write the long poem, but I think this is it. It's
epic poetry in the sense that the epic poem is a communal form, and
long and social. I wrote it for you. That's what the title means in
a way. I know there's a more technical definition for epic poetry
but that seems the best way to get it wrong. I'm more interested in
what Joyce Carol Oates did in **Blonde** than Seamus Heaney's prize
cow. Poets should write novels en masse and reinvent the form and
really muck up the landscape. I often think of Leslie Scalapino
telling me that her long book the return of painting, etc. was called
a novel because a novel means you start at the beginning and you read
to the end. It was a way to guarantee she could be read differently.
I don't care about that particular aspect, the front to back thing
but being read differently of course is nice. Time is my real subject
and calling a book a novel immediately adjusts the reader's
perception of time.

My book is shuffled if you take the long view. When I started to
write the first chapter which was a story, the whole thing is a story
for me, it occurred to me that a novel could just be all these
stories shuffled, and I thought of books I loved long ago, Julio
Cortazar's Hopscotch. I read that book straight through, but I read
it differently knowing that he had that chart at the front suggesting
you could alternately read it this way, and that the book could
permute all these different ways. I'm in love with the form of the
novel being molten, not putting the power of reordering in the hands
of the reader but to extend to the reader a sense that the form of
the book is as accidental as life. It's studied, damn studied, the
cool casual life as is the cool casual novel, but as accidental as
say the zabruder footage. Some guy happened to be there with his
camera, and as it turns out history was made. As it turns out he gave
us our only window onto that day in Dallas. When one realizes that
John Clare inadvertently gave us the first No Trespassing signs in
literature you realize bumpkins must write first, not last.

One more note on that---everything's visual and in even or
especially in advertising the oddly cropped shot is what's used.
Literature as it's sold today is so backwards. Hand held literature
is of course what I'm selling. It\'s not a memoir, it\'s a
recording. And even purporting to be a bad recording at times. As a
female writer the pose of awkwardness is very dangerous though
because at this post feminist moment one should be a top, one should
win etc. But female in history is ground down, anonymous, untold.
That's the story that\'s interesting.

And another thing: more poet's novel. In **Chelsea Girl\'s** \"My
Father's Alcoholism\" was the story where I stretched myself, and
tried to write out of pools and see how they would build. I just
literally go into a room (one labeled my father's alcoholism) and
begin inventorying the memories, the substance of the memory, the
materiality of it. The fur of childhood, not the feelings. When I was
done with one I would wait and let another one grow. It really is
like walking in the rain. Can that generate a narrative,or a
narrative feel? It sure works in movies. But movies have the dark on
their side. My hope is that by being as solipsistically in my mind,
downloading erratic shaped drops and letting some momentum build on
that order, rather than an order based on action, you can kind of
reverse our assumptions about activity. Or maybe I mean self.
There's a beautiful math to it, like music if you just let yourself
go and describe the experience of your life like it's some public
spectacle you are privy to and you‚ re waiting for the music of the
information along with everyone else. I feel less alone when I tell
my most private stories than any other time. This does link up to
performance. When you are acting or even reciting a text you wrote
and you're on a darkened stage under a pool of light there\'s a
terror as you're singing along with the text, its like driving, that
moment at night when you think shit I could just pile into the
opposite lane and that would be it. The self could just smash into
the light and dark and be gone forever. So you feel contained within
the details by that sense of danger and that provides the tension
while you proceed lavishly downloading "me\" in every ribbony way I
can imagine.

The limitations of "New York School\" have been what Frank did, what
John does, are you like Jimmy. Mustn't forget Kenneth or Barbara.
It's like Mt. Rushmore. You can say some quick thing about them
all---it's chatty abstraction, it\'s American speech, and I\'ve
learned different things from all of them but since they are just
people I think it's tone that people wind up miming, or concerns
rather than electricity, the weight and pause and incredible expanse
of the exploring mind in speech. I discovered what I sound like long
ago and of course I go where they wouldn't and couldn\'t so it\'s
sort of like explaining why you prefer not being a corpse. New York
school mimed is worse than academic, it's like my dad being a
mailman coming home with the Ivy League clothes from the Harvard
dorms where he had his route. You have to blow that up pretty quickly
but it's just sad. Let\'s face it, they were just as New critical as
everyone else in the fifties. They all would assert the poetry was
not about them. It's about skimming the surface of the self. Using
that facility to shape the poem. My dirty secret has always been that
it's of course about me. But I have been educated to believe I\'m no
one so there's a different self operating and I\'m desperate to
unburden my self of my self so I'm coming from nowhere and
returning. That's sort of classic. You just cannot underestimate the
massive difference in writing out of female anonymity. It blows all
the styles out of the water.

I think the form of the novel gives dignity to my shame. Sometimes
I'm just ashamed to block the sun. Performance, and I include
readings in that, makes the body be the container for the work. It is
when you write the words of course. The body always seems like the
shame. The camera must cut away to the trees, the animal is telling
too much. The animal doesn't want to die etc. If you\'ve ever sat on
a panel when some people read and some people speak directly the
difference in those two deliveries in terms of the room's
interaction with the speakers is immeasurable. The dangerous loose
canon is *how* we conduct public life---we want to stifle the stray
remark and we want to house it. I'm totally translating that impulse
into a several hundred page thing, my sorrowful body is now text.
It's like a zoo.

One last thought. In the **Times** there's occasionally these
articles where the great artist, Brice Marden or whoever takes us
into the met to see the work that is interesting to them. I started
reading Robert Smithson a couple of years ago and his move out of the
studio helped me understand the poet's situation, having no such
institution to tour through, having no **Times** to conduct the tour
in, and possibly being invisible because of that. Smithson yearned to
kick free of that structure that has been happily plunked down ever
more solidly. It seems like a novel is the only way to prove I was
here. Exactly how I was here. It's a social poetic invention.



[^2_myles_note1]: *Cool for You*, New York: Soft Skull Press, 2000


