

\mainmatter




# Kathy Acker: The Killers





I wrote a piece today and it's really just the beginning of something
on narration. I've got time trouble because of overwork. You know:
you're broke, and you take on too much work, and then you fuck up on
everything. It's never ending.


So understand this is simple and it's the beginning of something. You
know, it's totally open rather than anything else.


And I thought we were going to touch on two issues talking about
narration. One is identity. That's an obvious issue, the business
about who am I---you know, this is all postmodernist shit. What,
therefore, is real? Is there any real? And the other issue is raised
by the quote from this little card that advertises this panel about
writing for century's end. Constantly there's this trouble hovering
in the air. The immediacy of all the danger we're living in, of the
possible end of both humanism and of humanity, that we might all be
going the way of the dinosaurs very fast. And that culture is going
the way of? of whatever---dinosaur culture. And when we talk about
writing these two things, these issues hover there.


But let me start, since we're talking about narration, by telling you
a story. Very simple. My story begins with my friend Bob Glück who one
day, once upon a time, as story structure goes, told me that he has a
certain habit. A habit of circumventing his own habits by asking his
friends to give him a reading lesson. What should he, Bob Glück, read?
Perhaps in order to improve himself, or perhaps in order to do the
opposite. So Bob Glück goes to Kevin Killian, another friend, "Kevin,
what do you want me to read?"


Kevin replies, "'The Killers,' by Ernest Hemingway."


Upon hearing this story, for this is a story, I replied, "Oh Bob, how
weird, Hemingway?"


"Not weird" replies Bob. "All the English students at San Francisco
State love Hemingway."


Two nights after this happened I had the following dream. First, I
have to tell you a few details about my childhood and about before my
childhood in order to elucidate this dream for you. I never met my
father. Though he was married to my mother, he left her when she was
three months pregnant with me.


When I was 26 years old, through an accident, I traced my father's
family. I wrote to them and they wrote back that they would accept me
into their family and we arranged to meet. I thought that I was going
to meet my real father, but I only met the first cousin. He told me
(and I think he was a little crazy---well not crazy but eccentric,
because rich people are never crazy), that perhaps I should not meet
my father. Why? Because my father had murdered someone who was
trespassing on his yacht. After remaining six months in a lunatic
asylum, the state had excused him of any murder charge. My father then
disappeared. No one now knew where he was, said the first cousin. And
so I abandoned my search for my father, for my life at that time was
hard enough, and this new trouble was simply not worth the trouble.


When I was 30 years old, my mother suicided.


Enough of my childhood.


I had the following dream: I dreamt that I was looking for my real
father. In my dream, I knew that it was dumb for me to do this because
my father was dead. Since I'm not dumb, I or the dreamer thought, I
must be trying to find my father so that I can escape from this house
which is being run by a woman. I go to a private detective. He calls
me a dame.


I say, "I'm looking for my father."


The private detective, who might be a friend, replies that my case is
an easy one. I like that I'm easy. We begin our search. According to
his instructions, I tell this private eye everything that I know about
my mystery. It takes me several days for me to recount all the
details. It was summertime in Dallas. Everything was yellow. I didn't
remember anything about this first period of my life, about my
childhood. After this not remembering, I remembered jewels. As soon as
my mother passed away, a jewel case was opened. The case, consisting
of one tray, had insides of red velvet. Perhaps I'm dreaming my
mother's cunt. I'm given a jewel which is green. I don't know where
that jewel is now. I have no idea what happened to it. This is the
mystery of which I'm speaking.


The private eye pursued my matter. A couple of days later he came up
with my father's name: Olen. This name means nothing to me.


"Olen. Your father's name is Olen. Furthermore, your father killed
your mother."


I thought, in order to dismiss thought, that's possible. The
detective continued to give me details about my father. He's from
Iowa, and of Danish blood. All this could be true, because how can I
know anything?


Now when I woke up out of this dream, I remembered details about my
mother's suicide. She had killed herself eight days before Christmas.
A note in her handwriting, lying beside her dead body, said that her
white poodle was staying with such and such veterinarian. Nothing
else. But despite this note the cops were convinced that my mother was
murdered by a man whose name wasn't known. Nevertheless, it was
Christmas and there wasn't going to be any police investigation
because the cops wanted to return to their homes, Christmas warmth,
and holiday.


For the first time ever in my life I had the following thought: My
father could have murdered my mother. After all, what if my real
father is crazy? At that moment I became very scared. If my father did
murder my mother, he could now be planning to murder me.


Now last week I was touring around and I found myself on a gig in
Roanoke, Virginia, where I met this absolutely wonderful writer,
Richard Dillard, and Richard told me that when he had been a boy he
had encountered his first proposition by a man during a showing of
"The Killers" at a local Roanoke theater.


That's the end of the story.


Also I should mention that in "The Killers" the name of the Swede
who's about to be slaughtered by those killers is Olen.


Now, is this a story, what I've just told you? Certainly it's
narrative, right? And each incident actually did happen. That is, it
was real. But a story? Stories are about something. And what I've
just told you---it's not about anything. It's not even about me. A
story, you see, a story has something to do with realism, and what
I've just told you, though each little bit was real or had happened,
has nothing to do with realism.


Listen to another voice as we proceed on this treasure hunt, or
narration. The voice of Julio Cortasar.


"Almost all the stories I have written belong to the genre called
fantastic, for lack of a better word, and are opposed to that false
realism that consists of believing that everything can be described
and explained, as was assumed by the optimism of 19th century
philosophy and science. That is, as part of a world governed more or
less harmoniously by a system of laws, principles, cause and effect
relations, well-defined psychologies, etc." That lovely world
order---that governing harmoniously by all these principles---we all
know is now over. Though Bill Clinton has a hype.


Okay, a little more on realism. Richard Dillard rightly calls that
narrative structuring named realism "reductive."


"But isn't that the central story of 19th century realistic
fiction?" he exclaims in his review of Alester Grey's marvelous
novel **Poor Things**. "The central story of realistic fiction: we
are born, we are misshaped by biological inheritance, economic forces
beyond our control, and cultural biases beyond our recognition, and
finally we die with our failed dreams on our dry lips."


Realism: reductive and dehumanizing.


"There's another order," says Cortesar, "more secret and less
communicable. That the true study of reality lay not in laws but in
the exceptions to those laws has been the guiding principle in my
personal search for literature beyond all naive realism."


Now return to the narration that I told you. I can't even say what
it's about: Bob Glück's conversation, my dream about my real father,
Richard Dillard's memory. Where in this narration lies the real? It
lies in the connections between the three sections; in the connections
between the "real" events and the holes, the silences. In the
slippages. Slippages into what?


In Moby Dick, Melville speaks of reality as the interstices through
which all of us fall. There's another, a further way of putting this,
of proceeding on our treasure hunt. These interstices can be named
chaos, or places where language cannot be, or death. When
storytelling, humans attempt to cling to meaning. I think of
narration, of narrative, or that narrative which tries to encounter
the real, as that which is negotiating between two orders of time:
clock time and chaos. The writer is playing---when structuring
narrative or when narrative is structuring itself---with life and
death. He or she is maneuvering between order and disorder, between
meaning and meaninglessness and so is making literature.


However, these movements between clock time and chaos in written
narrative are more structurally complex. To begin, consider one aspect
of time in the novel: time. What? The time it takes to write a novel.
A novel's a big thing. I'm talking about novel narration at the
moment because that's what I deal with. It usually takes at least a
year, often many years. During that time the writer's life changes.
So there's the time of all the actual changes the writer is going
through---the time it takes to write the novel.


Two: the time it takes to read a novel. A novel is very rarely
something you read in one sitting. So that time it takes to read a
novel incorporates all the readers memories, all the interstices of
time, the time lapses between readings, all the returns to earlier
parts of the novel, etc. Three: the fictive time. The time within the
story or the narrations. Even Hopscotch---there's fictive time there.
So in this sense a novel, structurally, is a time triad.


Rather than continue with this---and you can start analyzing
novelistic structure---I want to just quickly skip to a final point.
Consider again realism. And I must say the more I think about it, I
think writing is more and more about time. Consider again this thing
of realism (I'd like to abandon the whole thing). Within the realm of
realism lies the assumption that language mirrors all that isn't
language, right? A table. That what a narrative is about: telling what
is or should be true. That a narrative mirrors reality.


Now do I need to say---how simplistic. But what I want to ask is, why
bother being so simplistic? Why bother with the lie of realism? Why
bother being so miserable, reductive, when one could play? If I'm
going to tell you what the real is by mirroring it, by telling you a
story which expresses reality, I'm attempting to tell you how things
are. By letting you see through my own eyes, I give you my viewpoints,
moral and political. In other words, realism is simply a control
method. Realism doesn't want to negotiate, open into, even know chaos
or the body or death. Because those who practice realism want to limit
their readers' perceptions, want to limit perceptions to a
centric---which in this society is always a phallocentric---reality.
"I am the one," says the realistic writer, "I'm telling you
reality." And we can talk. I have the same quarrel about narrowing
anything to single identity.


In other words, behind every literary or cultural issue lies the
political, the realm of political power. And whenever we talk about
narration, narrative structure, we're talking about political power.
There are no ivory towers. The desire to play, to make literary
structures which play into and in unknown or unknowable realms, those
of chance and death and the lack of language, is the desire to live in
a world that is open and dangerous, that is limitless. To play, then,
both in structure and in content, is to desire to live in wonder.


## Note 

Kathy Acker gave this talk on a panel called "In Extremis,
Writing at the Century's End." The panel was presented by Small
Press Traffic in the New College Theater in San Francisco on April 29,
1993. Fortunately, the event was videotaped by S.S. Kush for his Cloud
House Poetry Archives (1557 Franklin St. San Francisco CA 94109,
415-292-5554). We are grateful to Kush and also to the Acker estate.
The tape was transcribed by Quintan Wikswo and edited by Robert Glück.
The panel also included Dodie Bellamy, Earl Jackson Jr., and Benjamin
Weissman.





# Lawrence Ytzhak Braithwaite: Last Exit to Victoria


| (5mins. of Murder Alone with **Wigger** and "Bloodland")



 

 

 

## 1

...as a child I was told that not knowing the alphabet will cause
illiteracy. It'll send you into a drugged out gangland life of white
trash nightmares and corner boy peddling to homosexuals, who are
professional players, obsessed with age and are willing to drag it and
you into emptiness. That in knowing the letters, Ill know that they
assemble to construct various images that become words. Words are the
narrative transformation of the images. Printing a page of unbroken
words is like a fresh tattoo. It captures a moment/place, sentiment
and period. It orchestrates the body in motion as it flexes to move a
pen/strike at a key/form a fist/lift a drink or move to a rhythm. The
words become the unspoken intertextuality of ethnic, racial and
cultural metaphoric speech. The metre of casual dialogue = a
rhythm/noise/visual/bass, a soundtrack to a post-literate train of
thought.

I dedicated **Wigger** to the sound of Slayer and Sonic
Youth---"Bloodland" to Cannibal Corpse (George "Corpsegrinder"
Fisher) = I dedicated them to sound. Slayer is for the fury and speed
and violence that the book has. Deathmetal is the living desire of the
neo-redneck burnout. It's all going after the sport of
brutality---the art of hurting someone. The walking jokes, with
targets on their backs, placed there by lilbitches, taking them for Mn
Ms. The only violence is, the way the words appear on the page, marked
by the slashes that connote rhythm of speech and interrupted thought.
They are like semi-colons = / the // are colons and so are the =
signs. Sometimes the - move out to separate speech---someone takes
lead//does a solo. Sonic Youth's sounds appear in the form of the
book dissolving. Deathmetal is just dealing with the situation. The
book and the story, like the characters, are trying to hold themselves
together. Brian and Jerehmia symbolize this the most. They talk. No
one listens.

...a printer ejects swatches of stolen tissue that collects the sound
and images of what is considered low brow art and skill//

Hardcore (H.C.)/Country/Rockabilly

Thrash and Speedmetal/Rap/Deathmetal/Blackmetal

Cinema/Television and;

Comics Books

Brian appears to be rambling but he makes the most sense because he
speaks through metaphor and his heart, like Black speech and
song---the negro spiritual, seeming to sing about a river,

when it is a code,

for an escape,

at a certain time,

from the plantation.

Gangsta rap seems to boast

about an evening

or event

but is just shouting

validity,

existence and

enterprise.

Brians grasp on reality becomes inconsequential.

Jerehmias story is dumbshow.

Brian surrenders his ideals and his soul, by killing Spook (the Black
hustler friend).

Jerehmia is just having his taken and he's telling you about it---but
I knew people in Atlanta that didn't want to hear about any of that
or them. I knew a boy from Tennessee hurting worst than what was going
as oppression under those 100 dollar Afro centric hats.

...Wordcore, Jamaican dub poetry, Rap and Rock Steady are disposed to
the Homeric boasts and catalogues of post-modern thugs/hoodlums and
desperadoes w/ the hope of kindness and compassion.

In donning the Black persona, symbolized through the silver jacket,
Brian finally does what everyone has been attempting to do throughout
the book. Brian is killed---his soul is killed, through the burden of
the weight of the Black youth---the Black persona, the persona of
deglamoured oppression. He has achieved the goal of being Black but he
is unprepared to handle something that the Blacks are raised to deal
with through centuries of struggle---youd suppose.

I met a boy with crystal smack grey eyes, who was offering to suck the
fender (for $5) off an urban assault vehicle for a painkiller.

If you listen and see the page, you'll see a tattoo and note well,
that some words are//

-Rhythm

-Lead and

-Bass

Jerehmia, he has no desire to be Black. He knows what the shit is and
he's got his own. He just watches the seemingly liberal Perry go
catch back the Black boy trying to bail on the whole scene. He just
knows that nothing that's happening, is about him or the niglet.
It's about the little men with big shirts and the chicks in bed or
sitting off from the Bar b q..

...strange how all the youngmen holding up walls waiting on passers
by had deep drawls, no smiles and trailers in their hearts.

The book and the story are collapsing. The spaces and sparsness of the
narrative is there to get you to listen carefully and read again and
close read and not take things at face value. People say more,
especially, when they've had a lifetime of hurt, through very few
words and the words look in ways that they feel---speeching in
accapella. The words sound the way they feel. The book shows patterns
of speech.

Mcluhan would argue the global village: technology is good---the book
people are lacking in the rich grammar of the TV = This is referred to
today as the post-literate generation---John Cages bastard children
turn to violence and the acoustic space of video and computer games
and the delicacy of words typed over television screens.

Mcluhan would argue...

...the acoustic

 

 

 

## 2

 

The Comic book uses frames and juxtaposition to connect the
disconnectedness of thought and words, be it through the gruff
noireness of Frank Miller, Dave Sim or Martin Wales "Kinder Nacht,"
or the smooth lines, colours and ruff justice of Todd McFarlane. They
collect the street sounds and activities the way Rap culture
manipulates and emulates, via spin art and samples, the ready made
terror of interurban life. To frame is to make perfect the moment of
the fingers striking the keys, which can be the repetition of words
and phrases = outlets ripping and shredding, w/ the knowledge that
framing is certainly an attempt to make perfect, to make the words as
enticing and elegant as the bovine euphony of a fascist's goose step.

Brian is condemned to sit, numbed out on pills, in a room, filled with
drag queens, watching them transform. Just like Brian's desire, and
the other characters desires, to be Black, the drag queens attempt to
be women, without knowing, that beyond the glamour, is a lot of
hardship and struggle. Drag queens die, as well, when they finally
achieve their dream of being a woman. It's not as much fun or better
than they thought it would be. They are unprepared for the daily
struggle and threats. You can see this on the page. They are boxed in,
allowing themselves to be, finally, separated from the freeness and
flow of the book. They must stay within the parameters. The glamour is
gone. They have to bear the actual pain. Brian has got the auditory
recollection of rape in his head. Brian is numb. Sos Jerehmia, but
he's numb from the beginning, any way. Hes just recollecting,
now---no need to figure. He cant hold it together, nor does he want
to. His flag is upside down, Oswalds dead---nothings right. You
separate the body from the mind and its all good.

...a word can be the hums or bops in the background as when a funk
musician beats the strings w/ his thumb---the buzz and scratch of a
tat gun on a steadied arm or back---the stilled breath and firm muscle
of a word or image engraved on a belly. It gets tied into the
paragraph. Some words take on the repetitive ecstatic riff of ska or
reggae or the decay of the crash/noise of H.C. or metal. They recline
on the page or in the air as if they were all going to amount to a
junkies last sigh. Instead, they collapse into the lost, disorientated
and somewhat satisfied image of Orsen Wells after thrashing a room at
Xanadu.

...and the book and story crumble into a final sustained note, done
through a note to Andrew from Jerry. "Bloodland" has a crack of gun
shot and shit and a heart beat. As it began on a note---it ends. His
(Jerrys) speech is proper and distant from the language of the book.
He has become a literary character of the Modernist sense.

Jerking the Modernist approach to distance, into "groovy times," is
the dumbshow to the contemporary adoration of the absurdist tragic
comedy = anti-romantic. It presents itself, today, through the jaded
situationism of talkshow culture. The sort that "Blast" and
"Counter Blast" utilized through the headlines and print of
newspapers. The newspapers place horror and glory side by side in a
folio that has a calculated randomness. It will always assemble to
state 1 thing = these events happen. It is only through such genres of
media (music/comic/print/television), that we can see that each has a
thing in common/coupons and advertising = rhetoric and metaphor. If
the passage of a text takes on the sound and image of the
disjointedneness of casual speech and media, then the results are not
only the coded tales being woven, but the presentation of the
brutality that leads to the violent outcome.

Jerehmia, he just figures...hes just feedback from a bass, right now.

**Wigger** and "Bloodland" are what the printer jetted out---a
conceptual pastiche alphabet from the corner or gutter. It assembles
the images in sequence which persuades the narrative to be pulled out
from under a character. Its what got them blocked off---formatted,
layed out, then pile-drived with carefully selected skin grafts of
onomatopoeias. The words takes Audens diver, diving w/ his brilliant
bow and takes it beyond the enthralled spectator. They suppose that he
has forgotten to test the water and has come out a dumb struck
paraplegic = what just happened/where are our people/who are our
people/do we have any people: NO. However, they still keep tabs on the
moment, place sound and period that left the object devastated, hung
over, and w/ an image permanently scratched and coloured onto his
flesh or hanging in a window.--

Oi Cheers,

Laz



# Mary Burger: Flange or Premises



Can I say it went on for a week. Can I say I woke up each day, and
went through each day,

"You were there, and you were there, and you, and you!"

Word went out, a consciousness with a consistency, looked at itself
looking at itself, halted the infinite regress, the mirror facing the
mirror, a language made possible a belief in location.

I wanted to speak as someone who had experiences. I wanted to speak as
someone who knew others. To have things happen, and to speak of them,

someone told a story to which I was unable to respond. The story was
the story itself.

 

I want the other thing. Hinges and holes and string. The impossible
appearing to be,

an engine, a large machine, an apparatus, a stage for a scene.

 

Can it be a narrator who doubts its premises?

The crumbling, if something will, whom it will happen to.

> "Lyric, whose operation is display, and narrative, whose operation
> is seduction.
>
> Who will speak for the beside-the-point?" (Aaron Shurin,
> Narrativity)

As what happens then, if what happens is always something more.

 

 



# David Buuck: Despite



## 1

One narrative theory is that Agents are social beings. Equidistant
from Los Alamos and Roswell, the artist Walter de Maria places poles
in the landscape in order to construct a grid. The land is not the
setting for the work but a part of the work. The poles are angled at
eighty-eight degrees else lightening always strikes twice. The primary
experience takes place within the grid. Weather is total.

One narrative theory is that social beings are agents. The grid is the
imaginary frame by which it becomes possible to sense the spatial
landscape. The grid dwarfs Agents, the grid in turn being dwarfed by
the landscape, provoking Agents to realize their own relation to the
spatial landscape. In that the grid itself cannot be comprehended in
its totality, neither can the spatial landscape. Castles are sand that
can't be shelter to kings. In that the spatial landscape cannot be
comprehended in totality, neither can there be kings. Rabbits nibbling
on apple cores are nervously aware that there can't be shelter from
weather. Humility is nervous awareness of Agents not being rabbits.

There are three agents in the landscape who are not kings. The
Agents' relation to the grid becomes paramount. Agent A's scale
becomes paramount. Agent B's silence becomes paramount. Agent C's
isolation becomes paramount. Humility is nervous awareness of Agents
not being kings. The invisible is real.

The spatial relation of sky to the landscape is such that the clouds
are pressed flat against an imaginary plane of glass. The imaginary
plane rests upon the grid. One narrative theory is that Agents' minds
function as the imaginary plane. The action is the air and wind and
rain. So-called natural elements are grounding such that Agents'
social being, in isolation, in being dwarfed, is grounded. That this
is not separate from Agents' social being, but rather central to
Agents' realization as social beings, is one effect. Rabbits nibbling
on apple cores are nervously aware that lightening always strikes
twice. Humility is nervous awareness of Agents not being total. The
primary experience takes place within the social grid. Distance is
total.

## 2

One narrative theory is that one never dies in photographs.
Equidistant from Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the artist Kenji Yanobe
builds nuclear-safe capsules within which he is photographed while
being in Chernobyl. That the artist Kenji Yanobe would be in Chernobyl
inhabiting sculptural objects for the ostensible sake of safety is
troubling to one. That the photographs of the artist Kenji Yanobe
inside nuclear-safe capsules while being in Chernobyl are
aesthetically pleasing is troubling to one.

One narrative theory is that in desiring the apocalypse it is
continually deferred. The artist Kenji Yanobe builds nuclear-safe
capsules for sexual acts. Such acts are expressed outward as
exhalations of perfumed music, compressed air modulated through
anthropomorphic trumpets, so-called safe sex ironized into cartoon
farts. That nuclear-safe capsules for sexual acts are aesthetically
pleasing is troubling to one.

One narrative theory is that one's apocalypse is inside. Such
apocalypse is not nuclear-safe, such sex is disharmonious, such art is
a cartoon that is actual. Agents inside nuclear-safe capsules are not
safe from themselves. Agents cannot be insulated in machines that are
cartoon, in art that farts its own radioactivity.

There are three Agents in the capsules who are not cartoons. Agent
Yellow breathes its own air. Agent Red eats its own waste. Agent
Orange is the machine that desires its own apocalypse. That the
technology necessary to provide safety for Agents is the same
technology that produces the effects from which Agents desire safety
is troubling, three, two, one. Castles are cartoon machines that
can't be shelter to kings. There are no kings, only agents.

## 3

The sky is always in relation to Agents' landscape. Even underground,
though that's a dream. In dreams Agents' own minds are the relation
of the imaginary plane to Agents' own underground landscape. The
grid's only function is to provoke Agents' realization of Agents'
own landscape in actuality. The grid exists so as to become invisible.
The grid exists so that it doesn't have to. The invisible is real.
Dreams are real. Shelter is context.

One narrative theory is that the sun never sets. Agent Yellow, from a
distance, disappears into the landscape. Agent Red is still
disappearing, though Agent Orange is still here. Perspective is
constitutive of Agents' social being. Agents have different
perspectives that are relational. Total perspective is ideology that
can't be shelter to kings. Perspective is constitutive of Agents'
social bearing. Context is shelter.

Being dwarfed is perspective that reduces distances between social
beings. Relations between social beings provoke social bearings within
the grid. Roswell and Los Alamos are two landscapes that provoke such
social bearings. That the historical landscape dwarfs Agents,
provoking such social bearings, is troubling to one. Hiroshima and
Nagasaki are two landscapes that provoke such social bearings. Social
bearings realize social grids that produce the social landscape. That
Agent A might become grounded, in its isolation, is one effect. That
Agent B might become grounded, in its social being, is one effect.
That Agent C might become grounded, in its social bearings, is one
effect. The social grid is constructed by the many social beings. Its
construction is relational to the many social bearings. Perspective
dwarfs the historical landscape. The sun never sets.

## 4

Dystopia is this topia, the cynically willed non-place of the
apocalyptic imaginary. Its filmy visuals are projected onto the
imaginary plane of glass that rests upon the social grid. The sky is
the image of the impending apocalypse. Its spectral traces appear
transparent when viewed from the ground up. The sky is always falling,
else the bottom falls out. Social beings labor at constructing the
grid to support the imaginary plane. Agent-sweat is radioactive.
Agents drink it as refreshment while awaiting the coming attractions.

One narrative theory is that one never dies in film. At the end of a
long day of grid-building it is nice to lie on the ground and watch
the bottom of the sky fall onto the imaginary plane. The ground is the
imaginary plane of consciousness upon which social beings construct
the social grid. Ideology is the nightmare made material by certain
social bearings. The ideological grid exists so that it might become
invisible. The ideological grid exists so that it doesn't have to.
The invisible is reel-to-reel.

One narrative theory is that Agents are never awake, except in
history. So-called nightmares are in actuality the history that Agents
desire to have been merely dreamt. Underground is the collective
repressed. At night it dreams itself through rabbit-holes into the
social grid. One narrative theory is that one never dies in dreams.
Rabbits nibbling at nuclear cores are nervously aware that history
always strikes twice. Humility is nervous awareness of Agents awaking
from dreams and being in history.

## 5

The artist Kenji Yanobe's sculptural objects, in that they provide
habitation, in the form of objects of safety and art, while at the
same time being distancing, in that Agents are further distanced from
the actual world, while still being in it, are troubling to one. That
the artist Kenji Yanobe would be in Chernobyl inhabiting sculptural
objects for the ostensible sake of art is troubling to one. That the
art necessary to provide safety for Agents is the same art that
produces the effects from which Agents desire safety, is troubling,
four, three, agents, two, one. Agents are never safe from themselves.

The artist Kenji Yanobe's photographs, in that they document art
providing safety, while at the same time being distancing, in that
they are further distanced from Chernobyl, while still being in it,
are troubling to one. The photographs are viewed outside of Chernobyl,
in place of Chernobyl, as art and as safety. They are already
happening, though in actuality they are not Chernobyl. Distance is
safety. There's no distance in actuality. There's no safety.

The artist Kenji Yanobe has not yet built nuclear-safe capsules for
rabbits nibbling apple cores. One narrative theory is that nervous
awareness is not enough to prevent an apple core breach. That the wind
from Chernobyl might kill the rabbits is troubling, four, them, three,
to one. That the repeated vocalization of "Chernobyl" might become
aesthetically pleasing by virtue of its repetition is troubling to
one. There are sixty-six dead rabbits in the grid. Their bottoms have
fallen out.

## 6

Sentry posts guard the perimeter. Their dogs are in nuclear-safe
capsules, making it difficult to chase the rabbits. Acid rain leaks
into the underground reservoir. Social beings labor into a future that
is still undecided. Agent-sweat is radioactive. Agents drink it as
refreshment while awaiting the sky to fall. One narrative theory is
that the sentry posts face in rather than out. Each pole waves a flag
advertising the coming attractions. One narrative theory is that there
is no perimeter.

Social beings that are also rabbits that live in underground bomb
shelters. Castles made of pamphlet bomb shreddings can't be shelter
for rabbit-kings. Rabbits have infrared night vision that always
strikes twice. They drink from the radioactive reservoir that runs
from Roswell to Los Alamos. That the wind from Los Alamos might kill
the rabbits is troubling to one. The sentries put the sixty-six dead
rabbits into piles to climb up and up. Else the bottom would fall out.
That the repeated vocalization of "Los Alamos" might become
aesthetically pleasing by virtue of its repetition is troubling five,
four, three, to one.

One narrative theory is that dreams are underground nuclear tests.
They mushroom into consciousness through rabbit-holes and
anthropomorphic trumpets. Cartoon farts are air-raid sirens that go up
and up. The music is the bomb. It makes the bottom fall out.

## 7

The underground compartment containing radioactive warheads is called
"The Pit". The warheads are angled at eighty-eight degrees, else the
bottom falls out. Agent-sweat is radioactive. Agents drink it as
refreshment while awaiting the bottom to fall out. That the bottom
would fall out onto Agents' heads is troubling, six, five, four,
three, troubling to one.

One narrative theory is that there is an underground nightclub called
"The Pit," where rabbits push up and up. The player piano is
programmed to perform eighty-eight degrees of sound, else the bottom
falls out. Music is the distance of time within sound's detonation.
The speed of sound is measured by the distance between lightening and
its thunder. Agent Yellow never strikes twice. Agent Red is not a
rocket scientist. Agent Orange is the bomb.

The speed of sound is measured by the distance between the bomber and
the detonation of its payload. The warhead is programmed to perform
eighty-eight degrees of separation. Its coin slides into its slot. Its
music is the bomb, whose bottom falls out. The speed of light is
measured by the detonation of the bomb within Agents' own bottoms
falling out.

## 8

One narrative theory is that one never dies in sculpture. Kenji
Yanobe's sculptural objects evoke a nostalgia for an apocalypse that
never happened. It is a nostalgia for the future of a past that is
continually deferred to a present that hasn't happened yet. It's
already happening. The so-called-and-ever-wished-for last instance
never arrives, and yet the present is-and-always-is this very last
instance. The apocalypse is always happening.

One narrative theory is that one consumes or is consumed. The artist
Kenji Yanobe has produced a never-ending simulation of a survival cart
race, which will protect Agents from radioactivity as long as Agents
keep inserting coins into their nuclear-safe capsules. Agents must
exit the capsule in order to insert the coins into its exterior
anthropomorphic coin slots. There is no future here, only the present
which enables Agents to survive as long as Agents keep consuming. The
rabbits chew through the string that is used for the coin-slot coin
trick. The only safety is to insert coins into another's coin slots
in hopes that the other will do the same. Distance is the opposite of
safety.

The artist Kenji Yanobe stands at the sentry post facing out, toward
the ruins of the future. Rabbits have infrared vision that can see
through the nuclear-safe capsule. The inside is lined with rabbit fur.
It's a never-ending simulation of eighty-eight degrees inside.
Agent-sweat is radioactive. Agents drink it as refreshment while
awaiting the survival cart race.

## 9

The social grid exists so as to become invisible. The social grid
exists so that it doesn't have to. That the invisibility of the
social grid might provoke the realization of the ideological landscape
is troubling to one. Even underground, though that's a dream. The
so-called social elements are the imaginary plane of social beings.
The imaginary plane stretches out into the distance, held up by the
many social beings. History never disappears.

The imaginary plane reaches from one pole to the next, grounded by the
many social bearings. The present disappears into the historical
landscape, though it's still here. That such disappearance into the
historical landscape might be the forgetting of social bearings is
troubling to one. Even underground, though that's a dream. History is
the imaginary plane of social bearings. Here it is now, stretching out
into the distance, held up by the many social bearings.

The social grid extends indefinitely into the future. Social beings
labor at building it outward. The apocalypse of totality is
continually deferred. Humility is nervous awareness that Agents are
grid-workers. That the social bearings necessary to destroy the grid
are the same social bearings that build the grid is troubling, eight,
seven, six, five, four, three, agents, troubling, to, one.

## 10

The Agents are in their survival carts. The carts fart perfumed
radioactivity through anthropomorphic trumpets. Agent Orange breathes
its own air. The music is air-raid sirens that go up and up. The
rabbits' infrared vision burns through the string that is used for
the coin-slot coin trick. Agent Red eats its own waste. It's a
never-ending simulation of eighty-eight degrees inside. Agent Yellow
drinks its own sweat. Agent-sweat is radioactive. Agents drink it as
refreshment while awaiting the coins to run out.

Agent A puts its coin into Agent B's coin slot. Agent B puts its coin
into Agent C's coin slot. Agent C puts its coin into Agent A's coin
slot. There are no kings to make more coins, so the grid-poles are
dismantled and melted into currency. Without the poles, the imaginary
plane's bottom falls out. The grid collapses into itself. The
perimeters collapse into their centers. Agents trade in their
narrative theories for the few remaining coins. The sun is setting.
The social bearings are detonated. In the last instance coins fall to
the ground in piles that go up and up. The sky is falling.

Agent Yellow's survival cart is red. Agent Red's survival cart is
orange. Agent Orange's survival cart is yellow. As they collapse into
one another, the detonation provokes the sunset. From a distance the
shutters click shut. That the sunset is a film that is aesthetically
pleasing is troubling, ten, nine, eighty-eight degrees, seven,
sixty-six rabbits, five, four, whom, three, agents, troubling, to,
one. Action.


## Postscript

One narrative theory is that there is always another narrative theory.
Action is choosing. The film reel is stuck in the machine. The
so-called sunset is merely the melting celluloid of one possible
future. The machine is the apocalyptic imaginary that desires its own
foreclosure. Agent Orange has killed off Agents A and B, Agents Red
and Yellow. But Agent C has managed to elude such foreclosure. New
grids are being constructed by social beings with different social
bearings. Action is choosing made material by certain social bearings.
Humility is nervous awareness that action is total. It's already
happening.

One narrative theory is that one never dies in writing. The writing
cannot in actuality provide safety. It is a machine desiring its own
apocalypse. In actuality it is its own social being, desiring its own
narrative theory. Here it is now, stretching out into the distance,
held up by its social bearings. Agent C is writing itself onto the
imaginary plane. The script has yet to be finished. It's already
happening.

 



# Jacques Debrot: Narrative is boring



Narrative is boring because it precludes the direct actualization of
the world through our perception. But there is no alternative;
narrative is both a disabling and a necessary condition of perception.
For this reason, boredom is the affective condition that writing
predominantly negotiates and exploits. However, it has always struck
me that boredom, despite its stigmatization, is, in reality, a
complexly ambivalent emotion. Somewhere Roland Barthes--in **Roland
Barthes** I believe---describes boredom, suggestively, as a form
hysteria (or is it stupidity that he calls hysterical?). Whatever the
case, I try to make my writing both as boring and as stupid as I
possibly can---in Barthes' words, "I agree to pluralize myself, to
permit free cantons of stupidity to live inside me." Error, play, bad
taste, incomprehension, artifice, and a lack of truth or
reasonableness are, thus, the narrative potentialities I attempt to
fulfill.

Paradoxically, with the loss of narrative's legitimizing and
explanatory functions, in much of the most interesting contemporary
writing there has been an increasing recourse to, rather than a
retreat from, narrative forms. My own work is transversed by multiple,
parataxic narratives and entangled discourses. Ideally (and
impossibly) I would like to produce a narrative that would need to be
read in the same way one "reads" a painting; that is, by orienting
oneself gradually, by means of various intensities and expressive
deformations of surface---the textual equivalents, if they exist, of
the mechanisms of collaging, dribbling, scraping, scratching,
scumbling, attaching, interposing, reversing, permutting, and so
on---to the entire environment and atmosphere of the writing; a method
aligned not so much with an aesthetics of fragmentation, but rather,
one that proceeds through the *accretion* and flux of many ephemeral
ruptures and stases.

This, obviously, entails a fundamental reconsideration of what is
traditionally classified as narrative form. However, for me, the
central question is not a taxanomical, or a typological one. More
important than the question of whether writing such as mine is
narrative, is the problem of how, in what sense, this writing can be
read as narrative.

The situation of communication---the roles of author and reader, the
relations of subject positions within the narrative itself, as well as
the historical contexts in which the meanings of the narrative
circulate---cannot be excluded from the kind of reading my work
attempts to invite. But even more specifically, I am interested by the
aesthetic situation in which my writing occurs. By this I mean I am
concerned most of all with my feelings, and with my tastes and my
preferences. Like everyone's, my experience of art, as Thierry du
Duve argues, "begins and ends with aesthetic judgement." It is
impossible---at least on aesthetic grounds---to be insincere to one's
tastes. However our preferences are not objective, and our feelings,
although they are our own, are also social constructions. Inasmuch as
literature and narrative are no longer given domains but generative
practices, what I want to experience in the act of writing, or reading
is to feel, as du Duve puts it, the conflict of values both within
myself, and within and for the cultural field as a conflict of
feelings, "to give in to the reflexive feeling of dissent. . . . To
give my consent to the felt absence of concensus."

It is this ongoing dissent--that is to say, my resistance to any
single unitary or consummating construction---that *is* the self from
which, as much as the goal toward which, I write.

 

 



# Jeff Derkson: "Text" and the Site of Writing



> "That the widespread textualization of the outside world in
> contemporary thought (the body as a text, the state as a text,
> consumption as a text) should itself be seen as a fundamental form
> of postmodern spatialization..." (158)
>
> --Jameson, **Postmodernism: Or the Cultural Logic Of Late
> Capitalism**
>
> "For its part the poststructuralist version of postmodernism
> worked to exceed both formal aesthetic categories (the
> disciplinary order of painting, sculpture, and so on) and
> traditional cultural distinctions (high versus mass culture,
> autonomous versus utilitarian art) with a new model of art as
> text." (72).
>
> --Hal Foster, **The Return of the Real**
>
> "A provisional conclusion might be that in advanced art practices
> of the past thirty years the operative definition of the site has
> been transformed from a physical location---grounded, fixed,
> actual---to a discursive vector---ungrounded, fluid, virtual."
>
> Miwon Kwon, **One Place After Another: Notes on Site
> Specificity**, October 80 (Spring 97): 95.
>
>  

I've started with this top-heavy loading of quotations to highlight a
general movement from textualization of (generally) the "outside
world" and place/site alongside a similar movement within (generally)
art and site-specific art in order to establish a frame to address how
the "place" of writing and cultural production could be
rearticulated. Aside from a poststructuralist tendency to read
structures as texts, how does this "textual turn" implicate writing
as a constructive act? Has the modernist literary project of writing
an imagined world been deflected through poststructuralism so now the
world is imagined as not only written, but as text?

Parallel to this "textual turn," which leads intriguingly to Mowing
Kwon's vague "discursive vectors," there has been both a related
mapping impulse and a constructive intent directed at "place." The
mapping impulse is both ontological and geographic (writing as a
mapping of a mind or of subjectivity, writing as part of the process
of realizing "place"). In popular media, texts, particularly novels,
are given a primarily ontological role, of telling us something about
the places we live in, and by extension to tell us something about
"ourselves" or to illuminate the author as subject. Geographically,
the constructive intent is perhaps clearest in a national
literature's assembling of images and icons to create the imagined
place of a nation and to the related levels of regional literatures
and urbanist texts.

In contemporary art, a sort of sociological turn and mapping has
emerged. Hal Foster cites Dan Graham"s "Homes for America" which
"mapped" typologies of American suburban houses as well as the taste
that they constructed and were based on, and "Twenty-Six Gas Stations"
by Ed Ruscha as examples of the "sociological mapping...implicit in
some conceptual art" (185). More recently, and more ironically and
more internationally, there is Komar & Melamid's "The People's
Choice" ([http://www.diacenter.org/km/]{.underline}) which uses
official polling agencies to survey a nation's preferences in visual
art based on approximately ten preferences (ranging from "Favorite
color" to "Prefer indoor or outdoor scenes") and then realizes the
"most wanted painting" and "most unwanted painting" utilizing the
information. While this project is lightly politicized around issues
of taste and in its adaptation of the current political tendency to
base policies on poll results, it is linked to current site-specific
art practices which, as Kwon notes, "routinely engage the
collaborative participation of audience groups for the
conceptualization and production of the work...." From this
collaboration, these site-oriented works "are seen as a means to
strengthen art's capacity to penetrate the sociopolitical
organization of contemporary life with greater impact and meaning. In
this sense the possibilities to conceive of the site as something more
than place---as repressed ethnic history, a political cause, a
disenfranchised social group---is a crucial conceptual step in
redefining the public role of art and artists"(96). A recent
example---and there are many---of this laying bare of the historical
determinants of place is realized in Stan Douglas' Nu*tka* which
presents a "Canadian Gothic" of late-nineteenth century Nootka Sound
on the Northwest Coast of B.C. through interlacing video images of the
area and disembodied voices of the Spanish and English colonizers.

This chronotopic imagining of place as the site of a repressed racial
(ethnic, class and gendered) history has been an obvious project of
literature. In Canadian literature, this project was determined both
discursively and historically. Discursively, the embarrassingly narrow
yet dominant critical trope assigned to the national literature the
role of providing a history to a country strategically defined as
having none. This necessitated a "return of the repressed" in
literature to counter the dominant literary (national) historical
projects. Historically, Canada has imagined itself as bicultural and
this framework worked to suppress the histories of groups other than
the French and English. Within this very generalized framework,
official and aestheticized responses to this historical repression
have emerged. Small-town history chronicles that celebrate a town such
as **Morden in Manitoba**, which can be bought at City Hall (here in
Austria these projects are very similar and are called Heimatbuch
[roughly, "homeland book"]) or a book such as Andreas Schroeder's
**The Mennonites** which provides, in a coffeetable book format, a
history of the Mennonites in Canada. More well known, and with a
larger cultural impact, Joy Kogawa's novel **Obasan** brought forward
the history of the Japanese-Canadian internment. Yet the moment that
novelists are taken as historians is as problematic as when artists
are believed to be sociologists or social workers. For instance,
Michael Ondaatje's **In the Skin of a Lion** aestheticizes the
history of working-class people in Toronto, as if the workers
appreciated the modernist aesthetics of the worksite and the
solidarity of shared labor rather than complained about the relations
of production and wages.

That these textual and visual models present place and site as being a
manifestation of history can lead to a deflecting of the present. For
instance, Roy Miki speculates that **Obasan** could, from one vantage
point, "become an object of knowledge as a Canadianized text that
teaches us about racism in our past" (**Broken Entries** 143). The
implication is that racism is relegated, chronotopically, to the past.
Douglas' **Nu*tka***, in its return of repressed history, could
mimic the trope of First Nations' culture as a relic of the past, as
being only determined by European actions, as the passive site where
the history of dominant culture is acted out.

Here I want to speculate on (and politicize in a different way),
Kwon's idea of place as a "discursive vector" as a means to situate
oneself within a present site. I write "politicize" because it is
possible to propose a move from text to discourse as a movement from a
static structure open to analysis (whether virtuoso or standard) to a
constructing determinant of place and subjectivity. Here place/site
would not solely be determined by histories (dominant or repressed:
emergent or residual), but by competing constitutive discourses that
both affirm and erode the local/national and the everyday in the name
of the global. Without solely reducing globalization to the effect of
a discourse, it is possible to perhaps clarify the effects of
globalization by understanding them as being discursively enacted at
one level, as having a constitutive effect. Discursive is not
synonymous with "fluid," "ungrounded," as Kwon proposes, but is
precisely constitutive and grounding. In this formulation, the
particularisms of a place/site and its histories are not just the
oppositional force to globalization (or the corrective to dominant
historical narratives), but an aspect of place that can be utilized by
globalism; that is, a dialectic of local and global, or site and
nonsite (if a place is imagined as siteless in its loss of
particularities due to globalization).

My own turn toward the discursive effects of globalism in relation to
place/site arose because of the contradictions I saw in the city in
which I was living. The city of Calgary in Alberta imagines itself as
a regionally-based "open-for-business" kind of city, free of, but
also wary of, the ills of larger cities, yet a city of international
standards. This discourse of regionalism serves to cloak the existing
relations of production which Calgary---as an "oil town"---is linked
into, and determined by. Global capital through the multinational oil
and gas industry whose corporate logos hover above Calgary's gridded
streets is a key determinant of both the social relations of the city
and how the city imagines itself. When the oil industry is profitable
(due to high crude prices or a manufactured crisis), the city thrives
and new homes are built, rents rise, corporate headquarters shuffle,
cigar bars and fusion-cooking restaurants open---in short, a lot of
money is made by a few people but the scramble for profit is on. This
imaginary masking of real relations, a kind of cognitive masking, is
what Arjun Appadurai cites as fetishistic: "The locality (both in the
sense of the local factory or site of production and then extended
sense of the nation-state), becomes a fetish that disguises the
dispersed forces that actually drive the production process"
(**Modernity At Large**, 42). In Calgary, the global forces then have
a direct effect on the planning and layout of the city, as well as the
architecture; the social space of the city (itself a constituting
aspect), is determined by the management of the effects of
globalization and localization. Seeing how the effective discourses of
place/region and nation could serve as a mystifying factor, blocking
the real relations of the city, I moved away from an investigation of
place and toward the discursive determination of a place/site.

As a writer, the emphasis on the constitutive discourses of site/place
can supplement site as repressed histories. These discourses must also
be seen, alongside repressed histories, as historical developments, as
constitutive elements of the repressed history and emergent history.
The site of writing then becomes imagined as a place of intersecting
discourses: not groundless and fluid but both determined and
determining.



# Robert Glück: Long Note on New Narrative





To talk about the beginnings of New Narrative, I have to talk about my
friendship with Bruce Boone. We met in the early seventies through the
San Francisco Art Institute's bulletin board: Ed and I wanted to move
and Bruce and Burton wanted to move---would we all be happy living
together? For some reason both couples dropped the idea and remained
in our respective flats for many years. But Bruce and I were poets and
our obsession with Frank O'Hara forged a bond.

I was twenty-three or twenty-four. Bruce was seven years older. He was
a wonderful teacher. He read to transform himself and to attain a
correct understanding. Such understanding was urgently political.

Bruce had his eye on the catastrophic future, an upheaval he predicted
with a certain grandeur, but it was my own present he helped me find.
I read and wrote to invoke what seemed impossible--relation
itself--in order to take part in a world that ceaselessly makes
itself up, to "wake up" to the world, to recognize the world, to be
convinced that the world exists, to take revenge on the world for not
existing.

To talk about New Narrative, I also have to talk about Language
Poetry, which was in its heroic period in the seventies. I treat
diverse poets as one unit, a sort of flying wedge, because that's how
we experienced them. It would be hard to overestimate the drama they
brought to a Bay Area scene that limped through the seventies, with
the powerful exception of feminist poets like Judy Grahn, and the
excitement generated by movement poetry. Language Poetry's Puritan
rigor, delight in technical vocabularies, and professionalism were new
to a generation of Bay Area poets whose influences included the Beats,
Robert Duncan and Jack Spicer, the New York School (Bolinas was its
western outpost), surrealism and psychedelic surrealism.

Suddenly people took sides, though at times these confrontations
resembled a pastiche of the embattled positions of earlier
avant-guards. Language Poetry seemed very "straight male"---though
what didn't? Barrett Watten's **Total Syntax**, for example,
brilliantly established (as it dispatched) a lineage of fathers:
Olson, Zukofsky, Pound, etc.

If I could have become a Language poet I would have; I craved the
formalist fireworks, a purity that invented its own tenets. On the
snowy mountain-top of progressive formalism, from the highest high
road of modernist achievement, there was plenty of contempt heaped on
less rigorous endeavor. I had come to a dead end in the mid-seventies
like the poetry scene itself. The problem was not theoretical---or it
was: I could not go on until I figured out some way to understand
where I was. I also craved the community the Language Poets made for
themselves.

The questions vexing Bruce and me and the kind of rigor we needed were
only partly addressed by Language Poetry which, in the most general
sense, we saw as an aesthetics built on an examination (by
subtraction: of voice, of continuity) of the ways language generates
meaning. The same could be said of other experimental work, especially
the minimalisms, but Language Poetry was our proximate example.

Warring camps and battle lines drawn between representation and
non-representation---retrospection makes the argument seem as
arbitrary as Fancy vs. Imagination. But certainly the "logic of
history" at that moment supported the idea of this division, along
with the struggle to find a third position that would encompass the
whole argument.

I experienced the poetry of disjunction as a luxurious idealism in
which the speaking subject rejects the confines of representation and
disappears in the largest freedom, that of language itself. My
attraction to this freedom and to the professionalism with which it
was purveyed made for a kind of class struggle within myself. Whole
areas of my experience, especially gay experience, were not admitted
to this utopia, partly because the mainstream reflected a resoundingly
coherent image of myself back to me---an image so unjust that it
amounted to a tyranny that I could not turn my back on. We had been
disastrously described by the mainstream---a naming whose most extreme
(though not uncommon) expression was physical violence. Political
agency involved at least a provisionally stable identity.

Meanwhile, gay identity was also in its heroic period---it had not yet
settled into just another nationalism and it was new enough to know
its own constructedness. In the urban mix, some great experiment was
actually taking place, a genuine community where strangers and
different classes and ethnicities rubbed more than shoulders. This
community was not destroyed by commodity culture, which was destroying
so many other communities; instead, it was founded in commodity
culture. We had to talk about it. Bruce and I turned to each other to
see if we could come up with a better representation---not in order to
satisfy movement pieties or to be political, but in order to be. We
(eventually we were gay, lesbian, and working class writers) could not
let narration go.

Since I'm confined to hindsight, I write as though Bruce and I were
following a plan instead of stumbling and groping toward a writing
that could join other literatures of the present. We could have found
narrative models in, say, Clark Coolidge's prose, so perhaps
narrative practice relates outward to the actual community whose story
is being told. We could have located self-reference and awareness of
artifice in, say, the novels of Ronald Firbank, but we didn't. So
again, our use of language that knows itself relates outward to a
community speaking to itself dissonantly.

We were fellow travelers of Language Poetry and the innovative
feminist poetry of that time, but our lives and reading lead us toward
a hybrid aesthetic, something impure. We (say, Bruce Boone, Camille
Roy, Kevin Killian, Dodie Bellamy, Mike Amnasan, myself and, to
include the dead, Steve Abbott and Sam D'Allesandro) are still fellow
travelers of the poetries that evolved since the early eighties, when
writers talked about "nonnarrative." One could untangle that knot
forever, or build an aesthetics on the ways language conveys silence,
chaos, undifferentiated existence, and erects countless horizons of
meaning.

How to be a theory-based writer?---one question. How to represent my
experience as a gay man?---another question just as pressing. These
questions lead to readers and communities almost completely ignorant
of each other. Too fragmented for a gay audience? Too much sex and
"voice" for a literary audience? I embodied these incommensurates so
I had to ask this question: How can I convey urgent social meanings
while opening or subverting the possibilities of meaning itself? That
question has deviled and vexed Bay Area writing for twenty-five years.
What kind of representation least deforms its subject? Can language be
aware of itself (as object, as system, as commodity, as abstraction)
yet take part in the forces that generate the present? Where in
writing does engagement become authentic? One response, the politics
of form, apparently does not answer the question completely.

One afternoon in 1976, Bruce remarked on the questions to the reader
I'd been throwing into poems and stories. They were self-consciously
theatrical and they seemed to him to pressure and even sometimes to
reverse the positions of reader and writer. Reader/writer dynamics
seemed like a way into the problems that preoccupied us, a toe in the
water!

From our poems and stories, Bruce abstracted text-metatext: a story
keeps a running commentary on itself from the present. The commentary,
taking the form of a meditation or a second story, supplies a
succession of frames. That is, the more you fragment a story, the more
it becomes an example of narration itself--narration displaying its
devices--while at the same time (as I wrote in 1981) the metatext
"asks questions, asks for critical response, makes claims on the
reader, elicits comments. In any case, text-metatext takes its form
from the dialectical cleft between real life and life as it wants to
be."[^1]

We did not want to break the back of representation or to "punish"
it for lying, but to elaborate narration on as many different planes
as we could, which seemed consistent with the lives we lead. Writing
can't will away power relations and commodity life; instead, writing
must accept its relation to power and recognize that at present group
practice resides inside the commodity. Bruce wrote, "When evaluating
image in American culture, isn't it a commodity whether anyone likes
it or not? You make your additions and subtractions from that point
on."[^2]

In 1978, Bruce and I launched the Black Star Series and published my
**Family Poems** and his **My Walk With Bob**, a lovely book.[^3] In
"Remarks on Narrative"---the afterword of **Family Poems**---Bruce
wrote, "As has now been apparent for some time, the poetry of the
'70s seems generally to have reached a point of stagnation,
increasing a kind of refinement of technique and available forms,
without yet being able to profit greatly from the vigor, energy and
accessibility that mark so much of the new Movement writing of gays,
women and Third World writers, among others. Ultimately this impasse
of poetry reflects conditions in society itself."[^4]

We appreciated the comedy of mounting an offensive ("A critique of
the new trends toward conceptualization, linguistic abstraction and
process poetry") with those slenderest volumes. My poems and stories
were set "in the family," not so antipsychological as they might
have been given that we assumed any blow to interiority was a step
forward for mankind.

We contended with the Language Poets while seeking their attention in
the forums they erected for themselves. We published articles in
**Poetics Journal** and **L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E**, and spoke in talk series
and forums---a mere trickle in the torrent of their critical work. If
Language Poetry was a dead end, what a fertile dead end it was!

New Narrative was in place by the time **Elements of a Coffee
Service** was published by Donald Allen's Four Season's Foundation
in 1982, and Hoddypole published Bruce's novel, **Century of Clouds**
in 1980. We were thinking about autobiography; by autobiography we
meant daydreams, nightdreams, the act of writing, the relationship to
the reader, the meeting of flesh and culture, the self as
collaboration, the self as disintegration, the gaps, inconsistences
and distortions, the enjambments of power, family, history and
language.

Bruce and I brought high and low together between the covers of a
book, mingling essay, lyric, and story. Our publishing reflected those
different modes: stories from **Elements** appeared in gay
anthologies, porn magazines, **Social Text**, and **Soup**. Bruce
wrote about Georges Bataille for **The Advocate***.
*
I wanted to write with a total continuity and total disjunction since
I experienced the world (and myself) as continuous and infinity
divided. That was my ambition for writing. Why should a work of
literature be organized by one pattern of engagement? Why should a
"position" be maintained regarding the size of the gaps between
units of meaning? To describe how the world is organized may be the
same as organizing the world. I wanted the pleasures and politics of
the fragment and the pleasures and politics of story, gossip, fable
and case history; the randomness of chance and a sense of
inevitability; sincerity while using appropriation and pastiche. When
Barrett Watten said about **Jack the Modernist**, "You have your cake
and eat it too," I took it as a great compliment, as if my intention
spoke through the book.

During the seventies, Bruce was working on his doctorate at UC
Berkeley. His dissertation was a structuralist and gay reading of
O'Hara, that is, O'Hara and community, a version of which was
published in the first issue of **Social Text** in 1979. He joined the
Marxism and Theory Group at St. Cloud which gave birth to that
journal. Bruce also wrote critical articles (especially tracking the
"gay band" of the Berkeley Renaissance).([^4]) Bruce introduced me to
most of the critics who would make a foundation for New Narrative
writing.


Here are a few of them:

Georg Lukacs: In **The Theory of the Novel**, Lukacs maintains that
the novel contains---that is, holds together---incommensurates. The
epic and novel are the community telling itself its story, a story
whose integration becomes increasingly hard to achieve. **The Theory
of the Novel** leads to ideas of collaboration and community that are
not naive, that is, to narrative that questions itself. It
redistributes relations of power and springs the writer from the box
of psychology, since he becomes the community speaking to itself. I
wrote "Caricature," a talk given at 80 Langton in 1983, mostly using
Lukacs' book, locating instances of conservative and progressive
communities speaking to themselves: "If the community is a given, so
are its types."

Louis Althusser: His essay, "Ideological State Apparatuses,"
refigures the concept of base/superstructure. Terry Eagleton rang the
following change on Althusser's bulky formula: Ideology is the
imaginary resolution of real contradictions. By 1980, literary
naturalism was easily deprived of its transparency, but this formula
also deprives all fantasy of transparency, including the fantasy of
personality. If making a personality is not different from making a
book, in both cases one could favor the "real contradictions" side
of the formula. If personality is a fiction (a political fiction!)
then it is a story in common with other stories---it occurs on the
same plane of experience. This "formula" sets those opacities---a
novel, a personality---as equals on the stage of history, and supports
a new version of autobiography in which "fact" and "fiction"
inter-penetrate.

Althusser comes with a lot of baggage. For example, he divided science
from ideology, and ideology from theory. Frankly, Bruce and I pillaged
critical theory for concepts that gave us access to our experience. In
retrospect, it might be better simply to "go with" cultural studies.
To the endless chain of equal cultural manifestations (a song by REM,
the Diet of Worms, Rousseau's **Confessions**), we add another equal
sign, attaching the self as yet another thing the culture "dreamed
up."

Georges Bataille: Bataille was central to our project. He finds a
counter-economy of rupture and excess that includes art, sex, war,
religious sacrifice, sports events, ruptured subjectivity, the
dissolution of bodily integuments---"expenditure" of all kinds.
Bataille showed us how a bath house and a church could fulfill the
same function in their respective communities.

In writing about sex, desire and the body, New Narrative approached
performance art, where self is put at risk by naming names, becoming
naked, making the irreversible happen---the book becomes social
practice that is lived. The theme of obsessive romance did double
duty, de-stabling the self and asserting gay experience. Steve Abbott
wrote, "Gay writers Bruce Boone and Robert Glück (like Acker, Dennis
Cooper or the subway graffitists again) up the ante on this factuality
by weaving their own names, and those of friends and lovers, into
their work. The writer/artist becomes exposed and vulnerable: you risk
being foolish, mean-spirited, wrong. But if the writer's life is more
open to judgement and speculation, so is the reader's." ([^6])

Did we believe in the "truth and freedom" of sex? Certainly we were
attracted to scandal and shame, where there is so much information. I
wanted to write close to the body---the place language goes
reluctantly. We used porn, where information saturates narrative, to
expose and manipulate genre's formulas and dramatis personae, to
arrive at ecstacy and loss of narration as the self sheds its social
identities. We wanted to speak about subject/master and object/slave.
Bataille showed us that loss of self and attainment of nothingness is
a group activity. He supplied the essential negative, a zero planted
in the midst of community. His concept of transgression gave us lots
of fuel, as did his novels of philosophic pornography.

Now I'd add that transgressive writing is not necessarily about sex
or the body---or about anything one can predict. There's no manual;
transgressive writing shocks by articulating the present, the one
thing impossible to put into words, because a language does not yet
exist to describe the present. Bruce translated Bataille's **Guilty**
for Lapis Press when I worked as an editor there. We hammered out the
manuscript together, absorbing Bataille gesturally.

Five more critics. Walter Benjamin: for lyrical melancholy (which
reads as autobiography) and for permission to mix high and low. V.N.
Voloshinov: for discovering that meaning resides within its social
situation, and that contending powers struggle within language itself.
Rolland Barthes: for a style that goes back to autobiography, for the
fragment, and for displaying the constructed nature of
story---"baring the device." Michel Foucault: for the constructed
nature of sexuality, the self as collaboration, and the
not-to-be-underestimated example of an out gay critic. (Once at 18th
and Castro, Michel pierced Bruce with his eagle gaze and Bruce was
overcome!---he says.) Julia Kristeva: for elaborating the meaning of
abjection in **Powers of Horror**.

Our interest in Dennis Cooper and Kathy Acker produced allegiances and
friendships with those writers. Kathy moved to San Francisco in the
fall of 1981; while getting settled she stayed with Denise Kastan, who
lived downstairs from me. Denise and I co-directed Small Press
Traffic. Kathy was at work on **Great Expectations**. In fact, Denise
and I appear in it; we are the whores Danella and Barbraella. Kathy's
writing gave Bruce, Steve Abbott and myself another model, evolved far
beyond our own efforts, for the interrogation of autobiography as
"text" perpetually subverted by another text. Appropriation puts in
question the place of the writer---in fact, it turns the writer into a
reader.

Meanwhile, Bruce and I were thinking about the painters who were
rediscovering the figure, like Eric Fischl and Julian Schnabel. They
found a figuration that had passed through the flame of abstract
expressionism and the subsequent isms, operating through them. It made
us feel we were part of a crosscultural impulse rather than a local
subset. Bruce wrote, "With much gay writing and some punk notoriously
(Acker the big example), the sexual roots of aggression come into
question. There's a scream of connection, the figure that emerges
ghostly: life attributed to those who have gone beyond. So in Dennis
Cooper's **Safe** there's a feeling-tone like a Schnabel
painting:the ground's these fragments of some past, the stag, the
Roman column, whatever---on them a figure that doesn't quite exist
but would maybe like to. The person/persona/thing the writer's trying
to construct from images---"([^7])

In 1976, I started volunteering in the non-profit bookstore Small
Press Traffic and became co-director not long after. From 1977 to
1985, I ran a reading series and held free walk-in writing workshops
at the store. The workshops became a kind of New Narrative laboratory
attended by Michael Amnasan, Steve Abbott, Sam D'Allesandro, Kevin
Killian, Dodie Bellamy, Camille Roy, and many other writers whose
works extend my own horizon. I would start by reading some piece of
writing that interested me: Chaucer, Robert Smithson, Lydia Davis,
Ivan Bunin, Jim Thompson, a book of London street games, Thomas Wyatt,
Sei Shonagon. We were aspiring to an ideal of learning derived as much
from Spicer and Duncan as from our contemporaries.

Most writers we knew were reading theory. Later, guided by Bruce, we
started a left reading group at Small Press Traffic, attended by Steve
Benson, Ron Silliman, Denise Kastan, Steve Abbott, Bruce, myself and
others. The personal demolished the political, and after a few months
we disbanded. From that era I recall Ron's epithet (which Bruce and I
thought delicious) *The Small Press Traffic School of Dissimulation*.

More successful was the Left/Write Conference we mounted in 1981 at
the Noe Valley Ministry. The idea for a conference was conceived in
the spring of 1998 by Bruce and Steve Abbott, who sent letters to
thirty writers of various ethnicities and aesthetic positions. Steve
was a tireless community builder, and Left/Write was an expression of
New Narrative's desire to bring communities together, a desire which
informed the reading series at Small Press Traffic, Steve Abbott's
**Soup** (where the term New Narrative first appeared), Michael
Amnasan's **Ottotole**, Camille Roy and Nayland Blake's **Dear
World**, Kevin Killian and Brian Monte's **No Apologies**, and later
Kevin and Dodie Bellamy's **Mirage**. We felt urgent about it,
perhaps because we each belonged to such disparate groups. To our
astonishment, three hundred people attended Left/Write, so we
accomplished on a civic stage what we were attempting in our writing,
editing and curating: to mix groups and modes of discourse. Writers
famous inside their own group and hardly known outside, like Judy
Grahn and Erica Hunt, spoke and read together for the first time.

Out of that conference the Left Writers Union emerged; soon it was
commandeered by its most unreconstructed faction which prioritized gay
and feminist issues out of existence. At one meeting, we were
instructed to hold readings in storefronts on ground level so the
"masses of San Francisco" could walk in!

During this decade--1975-1985--Bruce and I carried on what amounted
to one long gabby phone conversation. We brought gossip and anecdote
to our writing because they contain speaker and audience, establish
the parameters of community and trumpet their"unfair" points of
view. I hardly ever "made things up," a plot still seems exotic, but
as a collagist I had an infinite field. I could use the lives we
endlessly described to each other as "found material" which
complicates storytelling because the material also exists on the same
plane as the reader's life. Found materials have a kind of radiance,
the truth of the already-known.

In 1981 we published **La Fontaine** ** as a valentine to our
friendship. In one poem, Bruce (and Montaigne!) wrote, "In the
friendship whereof I speak...our souls mingle and blend in a fusion
so complete that the seam that joins them disappears and is found no
more. If pressed to say why I loved him I'd reply, because it was
him, because it was me."([^9])

In using the tag New Narrative, I concede there is such a thing. In
the past I was reluctant to promote a literary school that endured
even ten minutes, much less a few years. Bruce and I took the notion
of a "school" half seriously, and once New Narrative began to
resemble a program, we abandoned it, declining to recognize ourselves
in the tyrants and functionaries that make a literary school. Or was
it just a failure of nerve? Now I am glad to see the term used by
younger writers in San Francisco, writers in other cities, like Gail
Scott in Montreal, and critics like Earl Jackson, Jr., Antony
Easthope, Carolyn Dinshaw, and Dianne Chisholm. Bruce and I may have
been kidding about founding a school, but we were serious about
wanting to bring emotion and subject matter into the field of
innovative writing. I hope that these thoughts on our project---call
it what you will---are useful to those looking for ways to extending
the possibilities of poem and story without backtracking into the
mainstream, or into 19th-century transparency.




[^1]: Robert Gluck, "Caricature," **Soup: New Critical Perspectives** #4, ed. Bruce Boone (San Francisco, 1985), 28.

[^2]: Bruce Boone, "A Narrative Like a Punk Picture: Shocking Pinks,
Lavenders, Magentas, Sickly Greens," **Poetics Journal** #5 ed.
Barrett Watten and Lyn Hejinian, (Berkeley, May 1985) 92.

[^3]: Black Star published **He Cried** by Dennis Cooper and **Lives of the Poets** by Steve Abbott. The Black Star Series still publishes,
most recently Camille Roy's **Swarm**, and soon John Norton's
**Re:marriage**.

[^4]: Bruce Boone, "Remarks on Narrative," afterward of **Family
Poems** by Robert Gluck, Black Star Series, San Francisco, 1979) 29.

[^5]: "Spicer's Writing in Context," **Ironwood** 28, Tuscon, 1986.
"Robert Duncan & Gay Community," **Ironwood** 22, (Robert Duncan
Special Issue, Tuscon 1983. Bruce's studies have led him to eastern
religion---now he's a non-denominational minister specializing in
caring for people who are terminally ill.

[^6]: Gluck, "Caricature," 19.

[^7]: Steve Abbott, "Notes on Boundaries, New Narrative," **Soup: New Critical Perspectives** #4) 81.

[^8]: Boone, "A Narrative Like a Punk Picture," **Poetics Journal**
#5, 92.

[^9]: La Fontaine, "Perukes" (Black Star Series, 1981) 63.







 

 



# Rob Halpern: Notes Toward (Es)saying "I", Narratively






> I was already being prepared for [the world's] tournaments by a
> training
> which taught me to have a horror of faulty grammar instead of
> teaching me,
> when I committed these faults, not to envy others who avoided them.
>
>              --Saint Augustine, Bishop of Hippo


**Once upon a time** is always here. Crisis, my origin: this fault.
Someone is called where I am compelled to explain. To make narrative
critically: this response to crisis. Otherwise it's narrative by
default simply because there is no other way actively to be here.

 

**From the Sanskrit root** *gna*, or know, our word narrative derives
bound to practice. In Latin, the root meaning appears to have doubled,
manifesting an otherwise latent critical difference. There is at once
*(g)narus*: knowing, expert, skillful; and *narro*: to relate or tell.
([^1]) A fault---mine, and ours---runs thru the space between. *Fault*:
deficiency, lack, scarcity; as well as slip, error, mistake. Also,
more critically: *fault* as dislocation or a break in continuity of
the strata or vein. *Here*, knowing is held in suspense and knowledge
is always potential. The process of telling/relating needn't connive
with already determined knowledge; narrative might, for example,
radically deviate, turning away from, or perverting, the very practice
of authorization, questioning rather than securing the position of the
one who tells. Here, between the overdetermined and the indeterminate,
*narrative determines*, that is, it constrains and enables, just as it
struggles and responds, testing the tension between knowing and
composing. *Here, we make our narratives ourselves, but, in the first
place, under very definite assumptions and conditions.* ([^2])




## I. Poetically


**At once wayless and wayward**, I positions a self *here* at the site
of narrative beginnings: place of mutability, place of many turns. The
crossroads of legend where every way is lost and every way is open.
Site of impossible possibility and paradox, where extremes coincide.
At once *here*: where aversion keeps one in place---*I: this paralyzed
fixture*---disinclined to turn another way; and *here*: away from
which every turn is perversion, an aberrant way away from the proper.
*Here* is forever shifting, the site of all potential, site of
suspense: where *aporia* (knowing no way, having no word, possessing
no resource) and *euporia* (knowing so many ways, having everything to
say, possessing it all in abundance) converge. Here is where I
intervenes in its own story, the permeable interface of averse
states---for example: impoverishment and abundance---as if with *two
faces averse, and conjoined*. In the space between states I spreads,
this narrative surface: at once this promise of disruption, this
promise of continuity.


**Crisis** is the point at which old orders no longer cohere and
*here* looms suddenly bereft of foundation. Here, for example, is
where Socrates steers his interlocutor: toward *aporia*-place of lost
ways. But what if this crisis could be experienced *euporically*, as a
moment of possibility precisely here where a way appears impossible.
Here occasions the paradoxical coincidence of antithetical terms. Not
the paralyzing absence of a way but the accessibility of always other
ways. Not naively, not as if everything and anything were possible,
but realistically, as if the site of narrative were the only place
where the impossible might open onto possibility.


*Here*: wayless, I is exposed; and *here*, wayward, I resists. It
seems so familiar: experiencing the simultaneity of political
possibility and impossibility. The fullness of the imagination
paradoxically constrained and enabled by a politically invested
environment which threatens to render that fullness innocuous if not
impotent. How to breathe this air that animates such cynicism, how to
live in this element that triumphantly promotes irony as the "task of
the day". Somewhere between the pessimistic and the utopian, where
these extremes coincide, where pessimism reveals its utopian bent:
here, one might ask how to think the moment when "nothing is
possible" becomes "only the impossible is possible". And here
another realism takes the world for its measure and referent: here,
where the limits of history, the bleak horizon that pens us in, meet
the pressures of the imagination.


**Discrete identities and sovereign subjects**---like the kings and
saints of history---are what they are by virtue of narrative strength.
But I am more interested in narrative frailty, narrative faults:
proxies and prostheses, artificial extensions, these interventions in
the world. Rather than narratives saturated with ends known in advance
of every beginning, I am interested in narratives that destabilize the
coherence of the I which, like a promissory note or stand-in for some
future fulfillment, suffers this contractual obligation to
self-identify over time. The self-same I, untroubled by difference,
might fill the space between disruption and continuity, but it cannot
fulfil it. The self-same I: at once the coherent *effect* of narrative
and the grammatical position to which one recursively returns to
ensure that coherence and whereby narrative possibility is filtered or
censored to preserve an ideal of intelligibility. Coherence, here, is
but the accomplishment of an optimal performance, a labored production
of social and linguistic grammars the faults of which are seamlessly
concealed *so as no appearance of any wound or hurt outwardly might be
at once perceived*. But there are other possible effects, other ways,
veering toward away or versing waywardly. What if, for example, we
were able to avow I's fictitiousness without and affirm our
necessary, if only provisional, belief in it. Here, rather than
persuading, narrative might perform its agnostic potential: the
promise of possible impossibilities that holds sway in the ambiguous
space between. This refusal of certainty, this averse turn away from
knowledge, this perverse turn toward knowing: this is not a
declaration of incoherence. Between impoverishment and abundance
(where impoverishment becomes itself a figure for abundance) the I
traverses narrative orders---disrupting and maintaining---while it is
simultaneously traversed by them.


**I goes between: a love story.** In Plato's *Symposium*, Diotima
locates Love in the space between ignorance and wisdom. Offspring of
Poros (way, resource, expedient) and Penia (wayless, poverty, lack.)
Love paradoxically embodies this antinomy and cannot give a reason for
itself. According to Diotima, Love judges *without being able to give
proper reasons*. "It is judging things correctly without being able
to give a reason," says Diotima, "surely, you see that this is not
the same as knowledge, for how can knowledge be devoid of reason?"
Jacques Lacan derives from this---in however faulty a way---one of his
characteristic figures for love: giving that which one does not have
to give. I am thinking of narrative like Love: wayless and wayward,
determined to do precisely what it cannot do. Its reasons are but
ruses. Between *aporia* and *euporia* Love is risked agnostically,
like a narrative that risks its own foundation. Sentenced and
committed, here, I goes between, exposed to every possibility of
rejection and loss, abjection and shame.


**Augustine and Stein:** Someone is called where I is compelled to
explain. "Well well is he. Explain my doubts, well well is he explain
my doubts.": this is how Gertrude Stein begins "Regularly Regularly
In Narrative" in **How to Write**. But the work narrative is called
upon to perform ("Explain my doubts") is alien to the work narrative
will ultimately do. Explain my doubts: at once the intended imperative
and the impossible end. My doubts will never be properly explained, my
uncertainty never properly reasoned away. Explanation fills the space
between ignorance and knowledge, but it cannot fulfil it. Recalling
another essay of Stein's, explanation is composition while
composition itself is figured as this "beginning again and again and
again explaining composition and time." And taking the perverse turn
toward the threshold of early modernity, there is Saint Augustine
determined to found the authority necessary to begin a book whose very
goal it is to authorize its subject. He, too, is concerned with
beginning, explanation and time about which he writes in the
**Confessions**: "If no one asks me, I know; if I want to explain it
to someone who asks me, I don't know." Between faith and doubt, past
and future, knowing and not-knowing, between 'he' (the partial
referent to which past experience is attached; it interferes with and
informs writing's present) and 'you' (a total referent---my
audience, my God, the other I love---to which "something more" that
escapes representation is attached and toward which narrative tends)
between all these faulty binarisms Augustine navigates a way to forge
an 'I': the vehicle and the effect of an other faith. Explain my
doubts: the self-imposed imperative to narrate, to compose a self. A
crisis in knowing runs thru composing just as narrative traces the
fault along which I becomes to articulate or align itself with the
world *in ways*. In the long afternoon shadows thrown by the likes of
Augustine and Stein, I am drawn to this, the faultiness of narrative,
its promise.


### To I this plot


> Grant me Lord to know and understand whether a man is first to pray to
> you for help or to praise you, and whether he must know you before he
> can call you to his aid. If he does not know you, how can he pray to
> you? For he may call for some other help, mistaking it for yours.
>
>           --Saint Augustine



The problem of beginning, the order of calling and knowing, is a
perennial preoccupation of both narrative and history. In our
postmodern era in which history has illusorily evanesced, narrative
promises at once to rescue the I from an indifferent individualism and
to turn the present away from indifference. Augustine's double bind
is here: in order to gain knowledge and understanding, one must call
or praise; but without knowledge and understanding one cannot know who
or what it is one calls. Mistaken audience is tantamount to mistaken
identity. Who is listening. Who is out there. Here, along the fault
that runs between audience and identity, narrative and history
continue to produce each other. Here, an I is "emplotted." Here,
Augustine's address, his "how am I able to speak to you?." the
fragility of its beginning, awakens him to the danger of being
dispossessed of precisely that to which his I professes to cling:
communicative possibility. But who is the subject of that possibility
if the I who depends on past experience for recognition is displaced,
transfigured by the new experience of narrating a conversion: the
advent of an other I? I is this essay, this attempt, this fragment,
this experiment---like composition is explanation---this reach
transversing the pronominal distance between "Explain my doubts,
well, well is he explain my doubts" and "how am I to speak to you?."
In reaching out, I, discomfitted, doubles over the hinge of this plot
and risks a world. Between belief and doubt, this communication
without guarantees: the very condition of narrative possibility.


### A crisis of audience


> How shall I call upon my God for aid, when the call I make is for
> my
> Lord and my God to come into myself?... Does this then mean, O Lord
> my
> God, that there is in me something fit to contain you? Can even
> heaven
> and earth, which you made and in which you made me, contain you? Or
> since nothing that exists could exist without you, does this mean
> that
> whatever exists does, in this sense, contain you? If this is so,
> since
> I too exist, why do I ask you to come into me? For I should not be
> there at all unless, in this way, you were already present within
> me...
> But if I exist in you, how can I call upon you to come to me? And
> where
> would you come from? For you, my God, have said that you fill heaven
> and earth, but I cannot go beyond heaven and earth so that you may
> leave
> them to come to me.
>
>            --Saint Augustine
> 
> 
> So then beside as any one can come to be certain of then if it is as
> it
> is that is an audience is what it is what is it if an audience is
> this,
> pretty soon then can feel again that an audience is this, and then
> introspection can go on but the habit of this thing makes it cease to
> be
> this, because the audience and is it this keeps going on...That is
> to
> say can does any one separate themselves from the land so they can
> see
> it and if they see it are they the audience of it or to it. If you
> see
> anything are you its audience and if you tell anything are you its
> audience, and is there any audience for it but the audience that sees
> or
> hears it...And all this has so much to do with writing a narrative
> of
> anything that I can almost cry about it.
>
>             --Gertrude Stein




Bewildered by the question of containment, uncertain exactly which way
to turn, Augustine's move in relation to his audience is paradoxical.
Turning toward what "there is in me" he intimates, indeed creates,
the depth of a private self. Simultaneously he turns toward "heaven
and earth" revealing the self's dependence on exteriority. But is
there an essential difference between the two dimensions? Must one
*aversion*---one turn away---achieve priority over and above the
another turn? Or might a mutable perversion---a turning aside from
truth or right, a diversion to improper use, a recognition of
necessary distortion, error, fault---intervene thus making coextensive
interior and exterior? Privative and excessive, I becomes this
permeable surface, this interface of in and out: this narrative
tension between self and other. Paradoxically, for Augustine, only a
turn away from the destabilizing question of audience, in other words,
only silence or not-writing, can ensure his possession of a self
untroubled by spatial location; only a turn away from either way will
ensure comfort and allow him to remain confident in the knowledge of
such a self *without knowing it at all*. Self-knowledge as stasis
annuls self-knowing as narrative process. The very fact of
Augustine's writing is testament to his recognition that aversion can
offer no way; it cannot ensure a truthful I, only a proper self, that
is, a property which must risk itself in the act of narrating a story
of origins, a return to the fault. As soon as one begins to narrate
oneself, one is adrift, exposed to the hazard of contingency and
doubt, relatively unmoored but bound to the world nevertheless. In the
face of political danger, I mobilizes narratively: hazard becomes
promise as I perverts a way away from established norms. Looking back
I still obeys, only paradoxically. *Here* crisis troubles the ground
on which Augustine is authorized to speak as "himself." Every word of
address threatens to expose the subject to the vertigo that looms when
the secure ground of "self-knowledge" gives way to groundlessness.
And *here* it is precisely the move to explain my doubts, to provide
for them a foundation, that makes foundation impossible. Truthful I's
are improper selves, selves held in suspense, in potential and *in
situ* in the space between. In the **Confessions**, this abyss, as it
opens onto narrative possibility, becomes paradoxically the very
ground of love and faith.


### Intentional fallacies


> They who write narrative and history do not do what they say they
> will
> do when they start out to do what they are about to do.
> 
>             --Gertrude Stein
> 

> What the storyteller narrates must necessarily be hidden from the
> actor
> himself, at least as long as he is in the act or caught in its
> consequences, because to him the meaningfulness of his act is not in
> the
> story that follows.
>
>             --Hannah Arendt




Around every one of I's articulations, a story begins to congeal, a
plot thickens. Once upon a time, I stands in for this memory of the
present, a lapidary effect of all the stories I've ever told. Here is
where I unbecomes along this fault in the world, this cleavage or
interruption that opens onto narrative in the discomfiting space
between where I never fits. Here is where I encounters oblivion and
possibility simultaneously on the threshold of another sentence,
another scene, another world. "It was at the threshold of a world
such as this that I stood in peril as a boy" [Augustine]. But it is
not, as in Augustine, "my past foulness and carnal corruption of my
soul" that defines the narrative fault; rather the I itself---the
risk and the promise.


### "Something more"


> Do heaven and earth, then, contain the whole of you, since you fill
> them? Or, when once you have filled them, is some part of you left
> over because they are too small to hold you? If this is so, when you
> have filled heaven and earth, does that part of you which remains
> flow over into some other place?
>
>             --Augustine




*That part of you which remains* cannot be represented, cannot be
assimilated to any way. You---audience, condition and limit of my
self---an unrepresentable horizon coincidently inside and out of me.
"For without you, what am I to myself but the leader of my own
destruction?" [Augustine]. Or, as Sandra Bernhardt titles her film:
**Without You I'm Nothing**. Her self composed thru an appeal to the
other. Turning toward 'you.' toward the invitation to explain, I
becomes, thru narration, *in relation to*. Relation alone saves one
from destruction while paradoxically establishing the bond between
'you' and 'I' which erotically threatens I's preservation as a
discrete and coherent self. Narrative's prosthetic origin: this
other, who both is and is not I. *You may* be I's determining "last
instance"---an absolute referent modulated thru innumerable social
circumstances that determines 'I' in the final analysis. You, an
Archimedean point doubled and reflecting two horizons, in and out,
creating this field of apparent depth in the space between. You is
equidistant from and coincident with I's every utterance. In relation
to you, I's meanings are measured. Thus is I realistic without being
real. Risking nothing short of love, the voice aims at "a particular
absolute... it aims beyond particular objects to that 'something
more' that exceeds them." ([^3]) That part of you that always remains.


## II. Politically


**Narrative as counter-statement**. What is the difference between
being called to state (called to call a thing by its proper name) and
being called to *the* state (called to recognize one's place within
the established order of things)? I ask this with the belief that
narrative has everything to offer the effort that would resist these
imperatives, enabling responses to always other calls. Called to state
and called to *the* state: names, like bodies, are assimilated to
established narrative orders. But narrative needn't accede to the
status of statement, or doxa: rather, it is narrative as
counter-statement, as paradox, that enables one to refuse stately
calls.


**Edward II, a digression.** The story of the English king Edward the
Second. In the sixteenth century, Holinshed, the popular chronicler or
historical narrator to whom both Marlowe and Shakespeare turned for
material, tells us that King Edward "began to hold the nobles in no
regard, to set nothing by their instructions, and to take small heed
unto the good government of the commonwealth, so that within a while,
he gave himself to wantonness, passing time in voluptuous pleasure,
and riotess excess: and to help them forward that kind of life, the
foresaid Peers who (as it may be thought, he had sworne to make the
king *to forget himself, and the state to which he was called* [my
italics]) furnished the court with jesters, ruffians, flattering
parasites, musicians and other vile and naughtie ribalds, that the
king might spend both days and nights in jesting, playing, blanketing
and in such other filthy and dishonourable excercises." [Chronicles
of England, Scotland and Ireland, 1587]. "The foresaid Peers" is
none other than Gaveston, the king's minion to whom Christopher
Marlowe has the Edward of his drama implore, "Knowest thou not who I
am? Thy friend, thy self, another Gaveston." To forget oneself and to
forget the state to which one is called are virtually synonymous
offenses that render Edward a 'bad subject' rather than a good
sovereign. They are capital crimes serious enough to land Edward in
the tower, where he is sodomized to death with a red hot iron spit. As
Holinshed reports, the method was chosen "so as no appearance of any
wound or hurt outwardlie might be at once perceived." Death appears
woundlessly so that Edward can appear in state. Were this wound to
surface it would assume the figural status of a counter-statement.
Here, between life and death, continuity and discontinuity; here,
around this sign of struggle, a different narrative would take shape
paradoxically, this intervention in the orders of state. Thus would
the wound's articulation make it all "connectedly different."


## Narrative difference


> When you consider the very long history of how everyone ever acts or
> has
> felt, it is interesting that nothing inside them in all of them makes
> it
> connectedly different.
>
>             --Gertrude Stein, "Composition as Explanation"




From Augustine to Stein, narration has provided the way for
re-articulating the world in the space between, a space inassimilable
to already established orders, a space where discontinuity and
continuity together define a fault "outwardly." But what about
politics? What about poetry? And what about the division of
intellectual labor that traditionally separates the two? Marx's
**Eighteenth Brumaire** is often cited in this regard: "The social
revolution of the nineteenth century cannot draw its poetry from the
past, but only from the future." But what if the inquiry into the
relation between narrative and "social revolution" were to focus on
neither past nor future but rather on this space between? Right now, I
am reading Stein's **Narration** beside Louis Althusser's essay on
"Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses". "The tenacious
obviousness of the point of view of production alone, or even that of
mere productive practice are so integrated into our everyday
'consciousness' that it is extremely hard, not to say almost
impossible, to raise oneself to the point of view of reproduction."
[Althusser]. In Stein's text, the question appears as follows:
"Can anyone separate themselves from the land so they can see it?"
And, as if in response to both questions, she writes "I am so certain
so more than certain that it ought to be done. I know so well all the
causes why it cannot be done and yet if it cannot be done cannot it be
done it would be so very much more interesting than anything if it
could be done even if it cannot be done." What is to be done is
precisely what cannot be done. Nevertheless, the imperative is
sustained: to recognize the unrecognizable, to do the undoable. Here,
the narrative imperative, like a Luddite wrench in the machinery of
state, would prevent the apparatus from reproducing itself. "To make
a thing a thing that they recognize while they are writing make it
something that had no existing before that writing gave it that
recognition, they tried to do this by changing something" [Stein].
This must be done. The point of view of reproduction is the point of
view of an antinomy defined by the apparent impossibility of doing
mutually exclusive things, like continuing and discontinuing,
localizing and sublimating. "Revolution" is a narrative not at all
unlike the narrative of conversion and it too is defined by paradox
according to which continuity with past experience must be maintained
in order to compose a discontinuous way *here*. Stein might be
discoursing on ideology and Althusser, at great pains to demonstrate
how Marx succeeded precisely "by changing something." might be
writing about narration. And while it is dangerous to reduce politics
to literary theory---and this is not at all my intent---it is critical
to ask whether any such success at making it "connectedly different"
is conceivable without narrative? To make it all otherwise: a
deceptively simple imperative. To find one's way
maplessly---aporically and euporically---along the fault. To essay the
unthinkable, to attempt to do it all by other means: that is to
practice narrative "as a socially symbolic act." Fredric Jameson
articulates this as a dialectical imperative: "To reckon one's own
position as an observer into the critical thinking in process...one
[then] no longer has to posit an end to history in order for
historical thought to take place." [**Marxism and Form**].


**Ideology *is* a narrative practice**. Narrative situates us
historically in the world. Once upon a time opens onto this critical
scene of telling and distributes an historical *here* equally thru the
space of narration. The scene is primal in the sense that it is
domestic; it frames a world within the world while promising a way to
encounter the frame. Narrative is also the vehicle of ideology: it
represents (in Althusser's formulation) one's imagined relations to
real conditions of existence; it is charged with the demands of
history, the production and reproduction of a world. And while
narrative can also intervene in the space between, narrators cannot
separate themselves from the land in order to see it. In other words,
there is no outside in relation to ideology, just as there is no
outside of narrative. To deny narrative, to resist its claim upon us,
is not so much resisting ideology as it is ideologically blind to the
fact that without narrative we are bereft of the means of
counter-strategy in the face of dominant and oppressive ideological
orders. This is telling, this is our common practice whereby the
limits and truths of the world are negotiated. In the making of
history, every composition is the site of as many decompositions.
Rather than the solution to crisis, narrative is the performance of it
(this fault to which I return and from which I emerge again and
again); not a repetition of prefigured limitation, but a
renegotiation, an approach, a reaching out that defines the world.
Here, 'I' appears as a provisional place-holder at the site where a
subject is called and assumed. The 'call' is a critical trope in
Althusser's theory of ideology where 'interpellation' is said to
hail the subject into social being. Accordingly, the ahistorical
individual is called to assume the historical position of a socially
intelligible 'I'. But I like also to think that, appearing as a
third term between the determined and the indeterminate, 'I' is
equally the effect of misrecognitions, incommensurable both with the
name by which it is called and the name I call myself. Mistaken
audience, mistaken identity. 'I' holds the promise of some
non-identical content: 'you' my audience and 'he' my self.
Narrative denaturalizes whatever 'I' and naturalizes only the need
to narrate. The space of narrative, then, is one of intervention,
conversion, transfiguration: where one renders oneself other than
oneself in a paradoxical quest for a more truthful 'I'. Selves are
called and recalled in turn. Augustine's ethic of conversion and
Edward II's ethic of friendship both articulate ways of potential
resistance to a prior call by way of a new response. Ethics are
ideological, but they allow one to narrate one's imagined relations
to real conditions differently, that is, to imagine it differently.

## Critical faith


> Only, how are they to call upon the lord until they have learned to
> believe in him?*
>
>             --Saint Augustine



But how do we come to believe in the I that is called? Stein writes of
"...names being not existing because anybody can know what any body
else is talking about without any name being mentioning, without any
belief in the any name being existing." Without risking belief,
communication lies in state. And belief, situated on the other side of
doubt and uncertainty, must be born in the space between, the space of
the call itself. This recalls Althusser recalling Pascal writing (more
or less) that one gets down on one's knees and belief follows. But
with a critical difference: belief needn't refer to the uncritical
reproduction of a dominant call and response; it might rather refer to
one *abandoning* oneself to a space between incommensurable calls.
Perhaps this would be the space of neither belief nor doubt but of a
more critical faith whose subject, whose 'I', is attentive to the
paradox: for what (or who) is the subject of *abandon* if one's self
is the object? While belief is necessarily ideological, ideology
isn't unequivocally "bad": in fact, it is necessary. Like
narrative, ideology enables. Here again, the crisis, the plot:
narrative's origin, this doubling along the fault which I essays.
Augustine abandons himself to narrative and in doing so the stakes of
communication are raised without offering the security of a
predictable outcome. If coherent selfhood is only an effect of
narration, and if narration is always a potentially destabilizing
force, then security is always already preempted when one risks a
beginning. This is both the promise of narrative and its betrayal. And
this is what makes Augustine's **Confessions** an exquisite act of
love, as political as it is poetic. "If poetry is the calling upon a
name until that name comes to be anything if one goes on calling on
that name more and more calling upon that name as poetry does then
poetry does make that calling upon a name a narrative it is a
narrative of calling upon that name." [Stein] The poetic tradition,
however, itself ideologically informed, has connived with the market
of names---authorizing it in ways---a devaluing trade in which names
are used and exchanged calculably as guaranteed referents, their
faults concealed. *So as no appearance of any wound or hurt might
outwardly be at once perceived.* Thus has the very need to call been
obviated and the space between, from which another way may be reached,
occluded. I believe, however, that in relation to crisis, it is the
response-ability of narrative to restore our awareness of the need,
and intensify our desire for another way.


And only by way of narrative might we unriddle "this knot of
imaginary servitude that love must always undo again." ([^4])


## Bibliography

Althusser, Louis, **Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays**. London:
New left Books, 1971.

Arendt, Hannah, **The Human Condition**. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1958.

Augustine, **Confessions**. translated by R.S. Pine-Coffin, London:
Penguin Books, 1961.

Augustine, **The Confessions of Saint Augustine**. translated by John
K. Ryan. New York: Doubleday, 1960.

Copjec, Joan, **Read My Desire**. Boston: Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 1995.

James, Fredric, **Marxism and Form**. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton
University Press, 1971.

Stein, Gertrude, **Narration**. Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press, 1935.

White, Hayden, **The Content of the Form**. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1987.

Williams, Raymond, **Marxism and Literature**, Oxford University
Press, 1977.





[^1]: Hayden White notes this etymology in **The Content of the Form***.*

[^2]: Frederich Engels writes in his letter to Joseph Block, September 21,
1890: "We make our history ourselves, but, in the first place under
very definite assumptions and conditions." Glossing this line in
**Marxism and Literature**, Raymond Williams writes, "What this
restores, as against the alternative development, is the idea of direct
agency: 'we make our history ourselves.' The 'definite' or
'objective' assumptions and conditions are then the qualifying terms
of this agency: in fact 'determination' as 'the setting of
limits'".

[^3]: Copjec, Joan, **Read My Desire**, p. 148.

[^4]: Lacan, "The Mirror Stage.*"*




# Laird Hunt: The Avenue



> _In my skull is an avenue I stroke_[^huntA]
> 
> --- Clark Coolidge

 

There is an avenue in my skull too---albeit one that is poorly
maintained, cavernously pitted, strewn with rubble, whole segments
blasted away; one that is curved, possibly circular, that, like the
backgrounds in cartoons, maddeningly repeats itself; one that is
ill-marked, with many a false turn-off and many a false vista; one
that is skewed out of proportion, that is frequently unsafe, almost
always unsavory; one that is troubled by converging lanes, of which
there are hundreds, that even resembles a parking lot in places and is
probably haunted---_hell of a place_[^huntB]. And yet, [I,
narrator][^huntC], stroke it, speak through its mess, speak of its
mess, multiply it. It's an interesting dilemma---aspects of which are
taken up in Adorno's seminal essay on the place of the narrator in
the contemporary novel---the narrator, with no story to narrate,
_narrates anyway_[^huntD], a story that has been blown to bits. Of
course not everyone sees it that way. We live in [an age of errata, of
misinformation, of disinformation, of hoax][^huntE]; perhaps it is
little wonder that there continues to be such a hunger for narratives
that, as Adorno describes them, largely by way of 19th century
techniques _mimic the real_[^huntF]; that say to us, with
disarming earnestness, this, my friends, is _how it was_[^huntG].
In the domain of the fictive narrative, I tend to have little patience
for such works. I am much more interested in (and seem only capable of
constructing) narratives that are to some degree aware of _the
provisional nature of their own authority_[^huntH], in which _the
fictive quality of recollection_[^huntI] is acknowledged, in which
_forgetting_[^huntJ] is considered the key constituent of memory,
and in which, finally, getting it right shares center stage with
getting it wrong.

 

 

[^huntA]:  Clark Coolidge, **The Crystal Text** (I think). It seems likely I might be alone in seeing in these eight words, words ripped right out of their context, a possible model for narrative.


[^huntB]:  For some years now Brenda Coultas, in her narratives, has been conjuring worlds to which multiple qualities of the preceding description might apply. Whether in her book **Early Films** (Rodent Press 1996) or in her recent chapbook **A Summer Newsreel** (Second
Story Books, 1999) Coultas is engaged in constructing usefully
disjunctive, lyric-enhanced investigations into landscapes that have
come apart. For me, part of the great thing about Coultas' writing is
that she brings an indomitable hunger for beauty to bear on her
cracked and spilling subjects.


[^huntC]:   E.g., Pamela Lu's terrific **Pamela: A Novel** (Atelos, 1998). A bildungsroman of sorts, an intricate chronicle of the coming awake of a highly-syntaxed consciousness, in which the greater part of the narrative seems to occur in between commas.


[^huntD]:  "The expression that there is nothing to express, nothing with which to express, nothing from which to express, no power to express, no desire to express, together with the obligation to express." Samuel Beckett (in 1949 conversation with Georges Duthuit).
 

[^huntE]:   
The tendered premise in a recent episode of the X-Files: since World
War Two Americans have had an unquenchable appetite for 'bogus
revelation'; having determined this, the United States Government has
built, presumably as a cover for its more radical weapons of mass
destruction programs, an elaborate web of alien abduction and sighting
hoaxes. This hoax, we are led to believe, may or may not be one. At
the end, intrigued to a ghastly degree, we are left both believing
(the elements of documentary inherent in the X-Files aiding this
process) that there are aliens around and that the Government has
cooked up (and deployed) weapons even more diabolical than the ones it
has copped to. This tv 'fiction' seems to me only slightly less
credible than what the evening news, reporting live from the White
House! serves up, or than the gamut of what can be found gathered up
daily in **The New York Times**. (The day after watching the X-Files
episode I read allegations by Puerto Rican petitioners at the United
Nations that the United States Government was testing uranium-capped
bullets at its facility on Vieques Island; during the debate an Iraqi
delegate stated that similar weapons had been used during the Gulf
War.)


[^huntF]: 
Harry Mathews, who, in part of his work, has vertiginously built upon
(see **The Conversions and Tlooth**, recently reissued by Dalkey
Archive), the wonderful, strange narratives of Raymond Roussel, had
this to say in a recent interview in Rain Taxi: "The great discovery
I made through him [Roussel] was that you didn't have to write
about what happened the day you fell in the swimming pool, but that
you could invent your own swimming pool that had never existed before,
full of quicksilver, lighted by imaginary lamps." Which, abstracted,
might lead to a formula something like, The writer is in the world;
the writing is in the writer. Or, looking at it from a reader-oriented
perspective, we might arrive at: The writing is in the reader; the
reader is in the world; Either way we are dealing with a considerable
degree of mediation. One I am interested in.



[^huntG]: 
"The more strictly the novel adheres to realism in external things,
to the gesture that says 'this is how it was,' the more every word
becomes a mere 'as if,' and the greater becomes the contradiction
between this claim and the fact that it was not so." (Adorno, "The Position of the Narrator in the Contemporary Novel")



[^huntH]: 
Among contemporary works, the narratives of W.G. Sebald (**The
Emigrants, The Rings of Saturn**) are exemplary in this regard,
pointing up, as they do, against the backdrop of this bloody century
(and with an apercu of others), the enormous difficulty of fixing
experience, both personal and collective. Keith Waldrop's harrowing
memoir **Light While There Is Light** (which calls itself fiction) is
another example. As is David Markson's intriguing **Wittgenstein's
Ladder**.





[^huntI]: 
Ryonusuke Akutagawa brilliantly treats aspects of this in a pair of
stories which were later combined and made into the much more famous
film **Rashomon** by Akira Kurosawa. Aaron Shurin writes, in passing,
in his 1990 essay "Narrativity," of the 'irreversible solidity of
the past tense.' I've lately begun to marvel, because of this
generally ascribed quality, that History continues to be written in
it. It was Herodotus, Father of History, who kicked things
off---neatly blending directly observed incident/object with reported
incident/object with rumored incident/object with imagined
incident/object. At least a good part of what gets built into the past
tense, then, is hardly irreversible, hardly solid. Pretty slippery, in
fact.




[^huntJ]:  
Walter Benjamin writes beautifully on this in the opening pages of his
essay, "The Image of Proust" (**Illuminations**): "For the important
thing for the remembering author is not what he experienced, but the
weaving of his memory, the Penelope work of recollection. Or should
one call it, rather, a Penelope work of forgetting? Is not the
involuntary recollection, Proust's memoire involuntaire, much closer
to forgetting than what is usually called memory? And is not this work
of spontaneous recollection, in which remembering is the woof and
forgetting the warf, a counterpart to Penelope's work rather than its
likeness? For here the day unravels what the night has woven. When we
awake each morning, we hold in our hands, usually weakly and loosely,
but a few fringes of the tapestry of lived life, as loomed for us by
forgetting. However, with our purposeful activity and, even more, our
purposive remembering each day unravels the web and the ornaments of
forgetting. This is why Proust finally turned his days into nights,
devoting all his hours to undisturbed work in his darkened room with
artificial illumination, so that none of those intricate arabesques
might escape him."

# Trevor Joyce: Why I Write Narrative





But, first: why not? A chain of telling that requires discrete and
distinct figures, already in some sense familiar, acting across a
background, largely unexamined and abandoned merely to suggestion,
towards the achievement of, or the failure to achieve, certain goals,
whose importance holds the earlier periods in suspense until in some
final resolution all that is significant crystallizes in a perfection
of plot and motivation, and all the rest, wanting any real brush with
language, retreats once more to ground: that's narrative as I knew it
thirty years ago, and it seemed then, as it does now, inadequate to
the world of my experience.


To avoid the fate of perpetrating such stuff, I instead wrote a poetry
which found itself increasingly characterized by argument,
deploration, pleading, threats, until I realized that I didn't like
how that worked either, and stopped writing altogether for about
twenty years.


But I went on thinking and planning and testing and learning, though
largely just in imagination. I took a shine to the detective genre in
which, in theory, any object or event can be a clue and, as such, be
exalted into meaning as the everyday world sifts through the riddle of
observation, inference and deduction. But, even there, the world
existed only towards an end in which all might be revealed, and the
head of Holmes had a strictly limited inventory capacity.


Eventually, it was only in the parallel forensics of Gombrowicz's
"Cosmos" that I found some satisfaction with detection, since
nothing is revealed there, and the patterns and clues are rubbish and
trivial chatter remains fraught, even on rereading.


I had by this time resumed writing poetry, though with conventional
narrative either expunged or twisted, and temporal change borne
instead by repetition, either incremental or with calculated
variation. My models for this were in the refrain structures of
folk-song, often mediated through the likes of Yeats or Lorca, and in
the interplay of stasis and movement in Chinese parallel verse. I was
forced to recognize, however, that the 'lyric' mode which I
practiced was quite as prone to exclude the incoherent world as was
the mannered narrative I so distrusted. I had also encountered Cage
for a second time, and with more understanding of how the play of
ambient noise across the receptivity of his spaces might circumvent
those exclusions and admit what might otherwise not be acknowledged.


I wrote a longish 'bicameral' piece called **Syzygy**, consisting of
two halves, "The Drift" and "The Net" respectively. "The Drift"
consists of twelve compact, elliptical, but distinctly 'lyric'
poems. "The Net" is a single poem of 72 long lines, comprising 24
three-line stanzas. Significantly these two sections are made up of
exactly the same phrases reordered, rigorously and exhaustively mapped
through a one-to-one matrix, the exact structuring of which is not
directly relevant here. There is a brief set of notes added, which
ground some of the detailed references of "The Drift" within the
empirical world.


For me, much of the significance of the poem is in the way in which
sequences of phrases in "The Net," arrived at through the blind
deploymen of predetermined procedures, carry a force both of lyricism
and of narrative, intense though severely fragmented in both cases,
which revealed a meaning different from and additional to anything I
had deliberately written into the work. Having lived with it for over
two years now, I have come to understand that "with the first dream
of fire they hunt the cold" and how "devastation fell attending
headbone the high" while "outside the foundries the clumsy the
deadlocked disintegrates" though "not a tremor manifests the rare
the quickening across these settlements" . So, I had confirmed for
myself that a densely overdetermined language, functioning in its most
intensely personal mode of the lyric, could survive radical disruption
and return from that alienation a yield which the reader might gather.
It gave the world an in.


I had meanwhile read all the Fu Manchu novels of Sax Rohmer, intrigued
the Chinese Doctor's ceaseless attempts to appropriate the world by
abducting experts in all fields, whose task was to analyse and
replicate in enhanced form all aspects of the workaday world. It
matched my sense as a child that what I saw in mirrors was a world
diligently assembled by unseen agents to match that which I inhabited,
and I watched carefully for small discrepancies to justify that sense,
but never found them, and the specialists of Fu Manchu's underworld
empire attended only to the great realms of science, technology,
politics, always were disbanded by resurgent law before their analysis
could address the classified advertisments in the newspapers, the torn
betting slips outside a bookie's shop, the inconsequential gabbling
of drunks in a pub. The workings of what I came to know, through Marx,
Adorno and Benjamin, as phantasmagoria fascinated and appalled me. And
how is responsibility to be assigned across mock-worlds if not through
the causal chains which are narrative's stock-in-trade?


Therefore:


| while detailed depositions state
| how further on
| within the wood
| . . .

| the bright axe
| blossom suddenly

| the long bones lever
| up from it like anthers
| and beyond the startling
| calyx of teeth

| an avid buzzing perishable
| fruit set thicken
| and disintegrate
| to load with sweet

| secure deposits
| of afflicting gold
| their remote cells . . .


Here is not just one narrative, but two. Firstly, the sequence of
blossoming, the detail of anther and calyx expanding, the fruiting
adumbrated in the gathering of bees about the flower, and their
dispersal to the hive where they load the cells with honey. This
apparently natural and value-free sequence is overlaid on another
causal chain, which starts with the felling of a tree by a logger with
an axe (commercial or strategic deforestation has a long and
significant history in Ireland as in much of the developing world
today). From this action, the causal sequence is run backwards,
seeking earlier sources where responsibility may be assigned: the long
bones of the arm, the gasping jaw of the labourer, give way to the
investors depositing their profits in banks. This single instance is
simple, but the structure of reversed causality running back from an
act of violence against the person or ecological ruin, masked
meanwhile by a natural sequence of a bird fledging or a mineral
cystallizing, is repeated twice more in the poem, broken by cases for
and against the possibility of asylum amid such wilderness. Here, I
began again to write narrative because the forensic process it allows
seemed to me necessary to any possibility of living ethically, of
recognizing and fulfilling due responsibility.


Another narrative genre which interested me is that of scientific
experiment, where the researcher actively intervenes in the course of
nature, attempting to limit the causal influences at work, so that one
element may be manipulated, and the change in another, dependent
element, observed and measured. It is intended that the record of
correct prediction and accurate calculation of effect may then grant
understanding of what was previously obscure.


"A body thrown vertically down from the top of a tower moves through
a distance of 88 feet during the third second of its flight.
Calculate, then, the speed of projection, and determine the speed at
which the sleeve begins to move upwards."


And yet, it is in a field complex with uncertainty, that we attempt to
understand, to categorize, to measure, and the experimenter must
attempt to exclude all forces not considered relevant to the
investigation, and accurately account for all that ensues.


"When he attempted to speak to her, the patient jumped off the bridge
falling some 30 feet into about 20 feet of water. There is always a
chance therefore that the critical act or change may take place when
the observer's eyes are withdrawn."


Yet we must dispassionately observe, measure and record.


"Mild plethora of the face ensued, it being divided into three parts,
namely: the forehead, fair complected, one; the nose, another, sand
present in abundance there admixed with small crustacean shells; and
from the nose to chin, exhibiting extensive tooth loss though with
roots intact, another. Notice the blood tinged fluid coming from
mouth. Red is warm and radiates across the ground."


In such a manner, sometimes we come to face what can scarcely be
countenanced.


"It may happen that we are not aware of all the conditions under
which our researches are made. Some substance may be present or some
power may be in action, which escapes the most vigilant examination.
Not being aware of its existence, we are unable to take proper
measures to exclude it, and thus determine the share which it has in
the results of our experiments."


Though the outcome be uncertain, may we still presume to have advanced
knowledge in certain quarters? Lacking the machinery of suspense, to
what end may such a narrative aspire?


"A man has several bones in all, and beauty is lost when meaning and
form are split asunder. The handsome man must be swarthy, and the
woman fair, etc., the genitalia, both internal and external, without
injury. Provisional diagnosis: probable drowning. And had we exhausted
all the known phenomena of a mechanical problem, how can we tell that
hidden phenomena, as yet undetected, do not intervene in the commonest
actions? I will not tell you about the irrational animals, because you
will never discover any system of proportion in them."


The plausibility of narrative is increasingly an issue for me, and not
without reason, perhaps, given the dominance of contending
master-narratives in the interpretation of the Irish past and,
consequently, in my present world. From such master-narratives it
seems worth trying to retrieve as much as may still have value. I have
tried this in a recent long work called "Trem Neul"---part prose, part
'verse'---which I see as, in part, an attempt to recoup part of the
history of my world from what Beckett terms 'the uniform memory of
intelligence'. "Genealogies. The elementary tables. Dictionaries,
assembled in blind frosts. Grammar and chronology. Libraries. Index:
the Encyclopaedia, damascened with ice. So is the perfect body of
knowledge dislimned."


How may one conduct a narrative of change, of loss and recovery, of
breakage and continuity, without presuming the existence of distinct
agents, freeing them incredibly from their ground, and committing a
plotwork of events, utterly plausible because familiar and foreknown?
Scholarship has shown us how the integrity and closure of the human
agent was arrived at in early Greek poetry, must we take that achieved
unity as more than provisional? Can we not tell without it?


"We build ourselves through the world and each through other, and
this proceeds to death as the world alters with experience." The
bodies in this plot are not distinct, either from one another or from
their ground, they emerge to make themselves, enjoy a transitory
closure, and then resolve again into a ground which offers further
figures. "When the biology of your body breaks down, the skin has to
be cut so as to give access to the inside. Later it has to be sewn
back like memory, when it may house all knowledge. Memory is our
comfort and our attire. Fashioned with our hands it is the
accomplishment of our dreams and lapses; always a meaningful pattern
though never an abiding one; a shifting harmony of sub-patterns.
Pretend I'm lost and try to find me."


Because I wish to work comprehensively with the world which I inhabit,
however, and because that world is current with named identities, I
have admitted one such, and one specific narrating voice to speak of
him. I have permitted myself also two specific occasions in time, one
exactly situated starting at about 11 a.m. on February 15th. 1838),
one not. Between the two is a connection, and my essay is to account
for that, to recount it. "Do not think it coincidental that memory
should begin to fail just as taxonomies become a prominent tool for
thought."


As, I believe Braudel and the Annales school refocused history on the
wholeness of ordinary lives, their habits, orientations and crises, by
attending patiently to things left, I see my present course, of
rendering the experience of connectedness, as being sustainable only
through exercising a similar patience with language. No longer
expecting to find there an exact mirror-image of the world I know, but
rather to have it deliver me one I don't.


| We will read
| every day
| in the afternoon
| When shall we learn
| to write?
| We shall soon
| learn
| I once went
| to Europe
| but I do not now
| remember
| what I saw
| there

It is in preferring to concentrate on the unpredictable ground rather
than to people it with puppets of my own making that I have elected in
these more recent pieces to work increasingly through collage. Each
fragment of language I adopt is already tale-bearing, a vector:
carrier from a prior host, director of action also across the space of
my world. And the point of such a narrative? Interim figures on an
interim ground; preservation of the complex weave of actions, not
denouement; attachment understood embraced abandoned; wanting
executive or summary.


## Notes

All quotations are from **Syzygy** (Wild Honey Press, Dublin, 1998),
available on the web at the Sound Eye site
http://indigo.ie/~tjac/Poets/Trevor_Joyce/Syzygy/syzygy.htm

<!-- 

I'll need to restore the footnotes manually, I think. They seem to have disappeared.

2 **Without Asylum** (Wild Honey Press, Dublin, 1998)
3 "Damaged, we bleed time." This is the central one of a sequence of
three prose-poems called **Hopeful Monsters** (Wild Honey Press,
Dublin, 1999, forthcoming). This section is available on the web at
the Alsop Review site http://www.alsopreview.com/tjdamaged.html
4 Ibid.
5 Ibid.
6 Ibid.
7 Ibid.
8 Samuel Beckett: **Proust** (Calder and Boyars, London) p.32
9 "Trem Neul," section XLII. The complete text will be included in my
forthcoming collected poems, **with the first dream of fire they hunt
the cold** (New Writers' Press, Dublin, 1999). The title is from a
phrase in the Irish language, meaning "through my dreams".
10 I have in mind the first chapters of Bruno Snell's **The Discovery
of the Mind** (Harper and Row, New York), and of E.R.Dodds **The
Greeks and the Irrational** (University of California Press,
California).
11 "Trem Neul," section XI.
12 Ibid, section XV.
13 Ibid, section XXXI
14 Ibid, section XXVII


-->

# Kevin Killian: Poison






I'm standing on a flat plain, and then, or so it seems, a little hole
appears in the sand ahead of me (like that movie **Tremors**)? The
hole grows larger in diameter, this is my sanity, and all the little
pieces of my sanity are breaking up and slipping down into the hole.
That's what it feels like. I'm trying to write this piece,
"Poison," about the ways in which the writer's personality
dissolves as it weaves in and out of the sentences he or she so
painfully struggles to produce. While writing it I notice a host of
familiar symptoms. Nobody calls me on the phone. I feel so isolated. I
can't hear very well and wonder if I'm going deaf like Beethoven,
like Brian Wilson. When people do speak it's with loud, ultra-charged
voices, as though they're annoyed with me. I feel like I'm losing my
mind and with my mind, the meaning of life I once held onto. I used to
think that people are basically good at heart. I used to think I would
be happy someday, but now I feel differently, that there's no chance
for me, since that hole before me is opening up and soon everything I
ever clung to will be sucked down into it and I'll be homeless and
curled up on the gutter outside my former apartment on Minna Street, a
crack-ridden block South of Market in San Francisco. I just bought a
car and there's not really any place to park it.


How did I write a whole book? I'm trying to remember. In particular
how I wrote **Bedrooms have Windows**, which I loved so much too, I
wrote it in part as a shipwreck victim sends out a message in a
bottle; in particular to my dear friend Terry Black, with whom I'd
lost touch a few years before. The book has many appeals to him to get
in touch with me. (Before the Internet, through which, apparently,
everyone is available to or traceable by everyone else, this seemed my
only recourse.) I longed to see it in print, feeling that he would
pick it up and call me. But after it was published a mutual friend
sent me Terry's obituary, he had died in Richmond, Virginia, of AIDS,
the same month the memoir came out. This was not the answer I had
hoped for. Part of me felt that **Bedrooms have Windows** killed Terry
Black---detailing as it did our sex life and its creation, the way we
had made up sex to answer certain suburban needs for the authentic,
the "real," the colorful. Naming names, his. Implicating others,
him. What portion of one's personality is a fiction? It wasn't going
to do any good to realize this was a sentimental fantasy, part of the
mind's response to the inexplicable horror of AIDS, part of my own
need to find myself on centerstage always. I went back to "Poison"
as I delivered it originally, as a talk in Bob Gluck's series, *In
Context*, a series of talks delivered week after week at Intersection,
once an important writing venue in San Francisco. This was a happier
time for me---April, 1987. When New Narrative writing seemed wide
open, a place where something entirely new under the sun could be
created. And that we were doing it, doing so. But "Poison" I found
out was imperfect, it didn't help me. "Last week Dodie Bellamy's
talk stressed the paradox of writing as a two-way street-the
importation of the world into the self, and the generous export of the
self back into the world. Bob's talk may have been allied to my own
idea of writing as an expression of the death drive from **Beyond the
Pleasure Principle**---what he calls 'Freudian pleasure based on an
instinct to return to the inanimate.'"


Every writing act is an act of dying, or killing, or mortification.
Every time I write it's to expose to the air of the page a false part
of my personality. ---I guess this goes directly against Bob's theory
of writing, and links mine closer to Dodie's, though not in any way
she'd like or approve of. My talk, I thought, would be a patchwork of
quotations, writing about me written by others; some that I wrote
about other people, lots I wrote about myself, and also work by others
that didn't have me in it at all---to give a wide scale against which
I could test my propositions. And the first was from Alan Davies'
book **Name**, which I found useful in its treatment of the tie
between language and self; is language a function of the word or of
the self? Or vice versa?

| The cryptic tongue.
| We are getting ourselves
| in the mood to have been
| done with having been done
| with this again.
| It's all very irreversible
| which is what
| makes its guts open up.
| I wonder how long it will
| be until this writes
| itself, in
| my direction. And we
| haven't proved
| that it isn't true yet.
| When I think of you
| the sentences come,
| but I don't.



Then I read a passage from Dodie's book **The Letters of Mina
Harker**, in which Mina, a fictional character, reflects on her love
life. In this passage I felt myself inextricably named and described,
my human body a vessel for a flood of narrative concerns.


Flaccid, KK's penis is endearing, so velvety and shy---but the
trouble with babies (as my mother always said) is that they grow
up---your bed inflates to the breaking point with
thirty-three-year-old male desire panting and prodding *the thing
inside burst through her belly, horror props, sausage links and
ketchup* around my neck KK fastens a locket filled with a snip of his
hair *to protect me from evil* I cross the street with my eyes closed,
cars screech then cease to exist, the atom remains unsplit forever,
cells multiply at a reasonable rate every death is from a natural
cause LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE LOVE remember when his
nails were half an inch long, thick, hard, yellowed---he clipped them
off for me parting my capillary pink flesh without a scratch *all it
took was one "ouch"* claws retract, breathing softens. He extends
his palm from the bathtub and says, "Sit on it," human form follows
function, in Cocteau's **Beauty and the Beast** gloved arms poke out
of the walls holding candles, their flames trembling as Beauty recedes
down the endless corridor *I wish I could walk through mirrors* our
entwined bodies tighten into a circle, a champagne bubble about to be
swallowed by Marilyn Monroe *pushing the metaphor to the breaking
point, in a word: orgasmic* when we fuck we are two great hands
shaking *his cock a thumb* in an explosion of light the bearded
creator in Blake's watercolor points from the heavens---mortal heads
bow or stare up in awe and terror the way I do whenever I'm naked *a
woman's hair is never thick enough to hide her thoughts* KK reaches
for a condom, fumbles with its little blue capsule PRESS FIRMLY ON DOT
AND PULL APART *town fathers pack data in time capsules burying them
underground, schoolchildren dig them up, crack them open a hundred
years later. Things.*



I used to ask Dodie, "Shouldn't it be, 'When we fuck we are two
great hands shaking his cock a *giant* thumb?' Wouldn't that make
the passage clearer?"
She said, "No." That's all. Just "no."

At first I was embarrassed by this passage and many others like it in
her writing, for if at any time my penis is flaccid I don't want to
know about it, nor the world to suspect it. At the same time, I felt
flattered, singled out by her language as I felt singled out by her
love. "Beauty recedes down the endless corridor *I wish I could walk
through mirrors*." The sense of the syntax issues a seductive
invitation into a mystery world---and I am that mystery. Then the cold
water hit me; with a start I came to and asked the difficult question,
is it I who is being described? *The Letters of Mina Harker* seem to
describe the sex lives, the love lives of two actual people, but of
course they don't, they don't even especially want to: their veiled
and mediating nature hints at this:


---extends his palm from the bathtub and says, "Sit on it," human
form follows function, in Cocteau's **Beauty and the Beast** gloved
arms poke out of the walls holding candles, their flames trembling as
Beauty recedes down the endless corridor

---and so forth, then the phrase "pushing the metaphor to the
breaking point" nails it. Do you know the funny feeling you get when
a stranger waves on the street, you wave back, and then you realize
the stranger's waving not at you but at the little weirdo behind you
in the brown fedora? One's identification with the words that seem to
conjure one up like "I Dream of Jeannie" out of black letters on a
white page is like---just like-the way your heart then sinks and a
blush colors your face; except it's even more mortifying---that
stranger on the street's waving all right, and you wave back, then
you turn around and it isn't even a person that stranger is really
waving at, but an atmosphere perhaps, a draft of air. Only convention
associates the wave (or the sentence) to a corporeal body like one's
own.

My next example I wrote. I quoted from **Bedrooms have Windows** to
give some idea of what goes through a writer's head when he decides
to name real people in potentially scandalous situations-sexual in
this case, but scandalous only insofar as they deal with the body;
also to suggest the peculiar vanity of the writer-and then I'll give
it a fairly close reading.


One evening several years ago I was lying in bed, after some
unsatisfactory fumbles towards "safe sex" with a writer I once
admired, Dennis A. He turned his head-exactly as he'd turned mine, an
hour earlier---and get this, he said, "Why didn't you think to take
home that Tom Boll too and we could have had a threesome." "Why
didn't I think," I replied, an echo of disbelief. "Dennis, I did
think; I thought and thought. Had I thought any more, I wouldn't be
having this safe sex. Madness wouldn't have been safe from me." I
felt attracted to him when he spelled his name in plastic magnetized
letters on Aaron's refrigerator. Then he spelled mine with the same
colorful letters. Language fused. It was like William Carlos Williams.
"There were plums in that icebox," I said to him. "Forgive me.
Forgive me. I couldn't help it; they were so ripe and so purple and
so cold."


I doubt if "memoir," the word "memoir," really disguises from the
reader, or listener, that something very close to a real event is
being described. And naturally many people will correctly identify
"Dennis A.," the writer "I used to admire," with the Australian
historian and sociologist Dennis Altman. I figured out that I call him
"Dennis A." to make the narrator's personality kind of coy and
obnoxious---and it works, doesn't it? Maybe I was miffed because the
sex we had wasn't very perfect---or maybe I thought, "He's
forgotten about me, I'll employ this sentence to haunt him." Writing
as an act of revenge, and naming names a superior way of taking it.
Like a virus, the poison of this passage will break down, over time,
whatever goodwill and nice feeling that I---my body---will have by
then created---like some ghastly race between life and death, immune
system and viral infection. Bob's novel Jack the Modernist begins
with a paradigm of intention, deadly intention, "You're not a lover
till you blab about it," where the ugliness of the syllable "blab"
is meant to suggest a whole medicine cabinet's worth of emetic
antidotes to the possibly-too-pretty word "lover."

The same watchful watchdogs will naturally conclude that this pick-up
scene takes place not just in anyone's kitchen, in the kitchen not
just of any old Aaron, but in Aaron Shurin's kitchen. Maybe they
already know of my admiration for his writing and his influence. When
I first met him I had just read his book **The Graces**, and I was so
struck by it I could hardly connect its author with a living human
being; it was, maybe, a gift from another planet like something out of
Chariots of the Gods. And since then I've gotten to know Aaron better
"as a person," but still blitzed by this admiration which---I see
now!---is another form of objectification, turned outward instead of
inward. Hence there was little psychic difficulty in turning his name,
like a totem, into an amulet to adorn my prose. Hence the repulsive,
shy-making casualness of using that name, "Aaron," and the
social-climbing note its use strikes here, as though I were his
intimate, or perhaps his boyfriend, and what is it in actuality but an
incursion on him, aimed squarely at him at his most domestic and
private, the kitchen setting, the letters on the refrigerator, perhaps
the implied sneer (leftover from the 60s) that the letters are made of
plastic. A plastic language. Doesn't sound like a recommendation,
does it? It's true that telling stories, "narrative," does involve
a local, in the sense that this quote of mine does have a certain
atmosphere, a sophistication, but it isn't really mine, it's
borrowed or stolen, the way you or I might borrow someone's boyfriend
or wife, return it to them and destroy a relationship like breaking a
milk bottle. (This isn't to suggest I haven't thought of the
pleasure it brings to writer and reader both, but---maybe because I'm
a Catholic---it's a guilty pleasure; there's pleasure in guilt too,
and even if there isn't there's the dying fall you get when you
string one word after another, after another, onto another, like bugle
beads. The pleasure of accretion.)


Next I'll read something I wrote for the "Jack Spicer" issue of
**ACTS**. My intention here was to get at what I saw as the malice
characteristic of Spicer's poetics, and I couldn't think of another
analogy except to describe an occasion from my own life, an occasion
when I felt malice directed at me.



My aim was to develop a visceral writing, a writing that would as
closely as possible parallel the effects of the anonymous letter:
insult, horror, shock and embarrassment. But did my face turn red when
I received one myself:

Dear Kevin Killian:
Your piece "Tom-Tom" in the latest issue of **No Apologies** aroused
my suspicion that you must be an asshole. First of all what is a gay
man doing writing about a psycho-killer of women and getting off on
it? I'm suspicious that it's easier for your fantasy screw to get
off when the victim is a (dehumanized) "Miss Thing" than if your
homicidal maniac lusted after boys like---just like-you . . . So
what's your story? If it isn't a good one, this dyke'll write you
off entirely.

Threats. Intimidation. A whole map of misreading of my adorable piece.
Again and again I read this letter, each time with increasing unease
and paranoia. I howled into the open air, "What have I done to
deserve such venom? Who wrote this tripe?" Despite the writer's
declaration, I wasn't fooled into believing him a woman. In my heart
I knew this letter is from one of my so-called friends-of the male
species. My only questions were, which one---and why? I'd been put
into the abject position, one I was to maintain for a long time.
Writing produces deracination, I decided, by own best example. So much
for theory. My content upset "her," I thought to myself. "Take away
the psycho-killer storyline and there'd be nothing even a child would
object to." And "her" form upset me. Isn't "dictation" Jack
Spicer's word for "receiving the letter"? You don't know where it
comes from; so you react badly. Martians are writing you, altering the
furniture in your room. I wanted a drink so bad I wound up in North
Beach! Bats flying from wall to wall, the whole schmear, and voices
writing all my poems and signing them with Dennis Cooper's name!

Here the dominant note of my writing becomes real plain: I'm talking
about hysteria. I mean that seriously enough, a line that runs a beat
too fast, that's capable of all sorts of unexpected connections
(which is good) but because it's hysterical is equally capable of
making false connections or ignoring the valid (which is bad). That is
to say, in my heart of hearts I don't really believe Dennis Cooper is
signing all my poems. Why, I don't even know what I meant by that.
That's paranoid, isn't it? But I had to find out, what are my rights
as a narrator and character?

When I put myself in this false position, I run the risk all divas
take: we might prove too much for even our greatest fans. And so I've
noticed the characteristic note when others write about me is comic,
often picking on my frailties as a real person and usually, by the
way, noting either that I love the stars, drink a lot of Tab, or also,
you know, drink a lot, of, you know, alcohol. The next passage is from
a story by Francesca Rosa called "Canidae" (the Latin word for
"dogs"). In it I thought I recognized myself as the writer, "K.":



As K. speaks, a worried-looking dog pokes its head through the blue
gauze curtains separating the reading area from whatever is behind it.
A black dog, except that its fur is so sparse the skin shows through,
a gray and black dog then with running eyes; the wattles of its throat
a livid pink. It brings the rest of its body through the curtain and
walks upstage of K. who is telling us a story about Long Island. The
dog explores, listlessly sniffs at the floor, the podium base and
K.'s ankles. It walks back and forth a few times, turns a slow circle
while digging its teeth into the root of its tail, and then stops to
stare at us, the listeners, again. Not at all shy, confident, as if
resigned in its desolation, like one of those Kafka characters that
have survived their own death. K. does not, or decides not to, notice
his center stage companion, and takes us from Long Island to New York
and then back again.



When I first heard this story I remember she was sitting on stage and
I was sitting in the audience, our narratological positions reversed,
and my ears got red, and a voice rose up in me with a strangled
scream, "You can dish it out, Kevin, but you sure can't take it!"
In Bob's talk,"Truth's Mirror is No Mirror," he says, "I wonder
if we are at the point of reversing Flaubert . . . by accepting an
artificial self, with its own scale, depth and continuity. Eastern
religion responds to a 'made-up' world with compassion---but with a
fatalism that is the flip side of Flaubert's scorn. To the degree we
'see through' Flaubert's scorn, we suffer from and enjoy a
self-contempt that is close to bragging . . . I wonder if it's
possible to be aware of the artifacted nature of the local and not be
contemptuous of it?---to understand it as a construct and be moved by
its depth?"


I was telling my sister Maureen that I was giving a talk on the
fiction of personality, and she nodded and said she knew what that's
about. Sometimes, she said, when she's walking down the street she
hears in her head her theme music so she feels she's starring in her
own TV show. Elizabeth Bowen wrote, "Nothing gets on the page that
you started with, and nothing you started gets on the page. To
write," she said, "is to rave a little." To this formation I've
added my own strategy, to rave a little before I begin to write, to
exploit the "fiction of personality" and to see, if not blinded by
the brushfire, what happens then on the page. When I was seventeen and
living in my parents' house on Long Island I threw lots of parties,
so did my friends Terry Black and Lance Mallamo, we did so to enjoy
ourselves and to write about them afterwards. This is from a story one
of them wrote about a party I gave, a story that begins with me
warning my parents to stay away from my party and my fun and my
personality and my fictions:


"All I know," pouted Kevin, "is that I care about this house as
much as anyone else and I think you're a hideous couple even to think
I'd let anything happen to it. Why I just can't explain the chills
that go up my spine every time I see it. It's like finding a lemonade
stand in the middle of a desert. When I think about the beauty and
splendor of this house tears come into my eyes. Its white walls, its
grapefruit shingles, its collapsible mailbox, the one-of-a-kind sodded
lawn, and, to top it all off like the cherry on a banana split, I
think our Spot, our pedigreed dog, out in the backyard rolling in mud
and barking at all passersby as if to say, 'I'm black and I'm
proud!'"


Kevin's fit of love and tears was interrupted by the doorbell. "I
just want to say one more thing," he said in a hurt voice. "If I see
either of you downstairs from now until tomorrow morning at ten
o'clock I'll set both of you on fire. Don't think I don't mean it
either because I'm pretty sure that I do."


With that he stormed out of the room, slamming the door behind him.


Later in the story Terry himself is in a car driving to my party.


"Terry," said Mary Phipps, a girl in the back seat. While drinking a
swig from a bottle of cheap apple wine she continued, "I'm glad
you're acting like yourself again instead of like Kevin Killian."


"Thank you," the courteous Terry replied through gritted teeth. Mary
Phipps smiled at him and he could not help smiling back. They were
true friends and he knew he should listen to what she had to say
whether he liked what she said or not. So he did.


"Not that we don't like Kevin," joined in another good friend of
Terry's named Sam Rye. "It's just that you're not him and we liked
you better as you."


Terry resigned himself to the friendly rainstorm of advice, opinions
and admonitions that followed. He could not help wondering though why
it was that Kevin always got almost all the attention and he, Terry,
so little.


But I've argued myself into a corner if I insist that New Narrative
makes room for the stupid, the overblown, and the nasty---these are
three different veins of my writing, each with its own jet flow. The
bizarre thing was that, after I delivered this talk on April 27, 1987,
the woman who had written me the anonymous poison-pen letter lifted
her hand from the audience and said, "Oh, I wrote that---before I
knew you better." Do we get to know people that much better that we
can change our minds so quickly about them? I was stunned. I remain
stunned. I think of life as a big empty desert place---cooler than
Death Valley---but just about as big---"I know! Let's call it Life
Valley!"

Where, as I pause for a second, clearing my head, trying not to write,
dragging myself from that particular abyss of memory and missed
opportunity, there a small hole appears before me, about fifteen feet
before me. And all the things I brought with me to this valley are in
my trailer, fifteen yards behind. And one by one I lose them down the
ever-expanding hole---cans, jars, movie magazines, photos, food and
books. The hole keeps caving in on itself. My little home on wheels is
silver, rounded like the new Volkswagen models, and drives like a
dream. Its doors shear off with a sudden crunch of metal, bright in
the noon air, they slither across the desert floor into the hole. I'm
next perhaps, hold on to me.




# Chris Kraus: Hunger -- Technology -- Emotion




From my LA diary ---


Los Angeles, sometime in the late 90s ---


My heart and stomach flip while waiting in the endless gourmet
take-out line at Say Cheese on Hyperion. This is the third full day
not eating .... I stare through thick plate-glass at tureens of baby
peas in mayonnaise. Ten bucks a quarter pound, they're canned. Little
bits of foreign cheese displayed on the top shelf like so many sad
specimens. English tilton, camembert. From the bodies of imprisoned
animals to the air-conditioned case, it's obvious this food was never
touched with love or understanding. The chubby woman up ahead of me
seems to think this food is good. She is luxuriating in the moment
when she speaks her choices to the shop girl, even though the girl is
bored and hardly even listening. I'd hoped to trick myself to eat by
ordering the most exquisite food but now this place offends me. Say
Cheese, Say Choose. She wraps the names of foods around her tongue,
pleased with her passable pronunciation. Why do I hate everything? The
food here is so vastly overpriced, it no longer smells like food, it
smells like bills and coins and plastic.


If I'm not touched it becomes impossible to eat. It's only after
sex, sometimes, that I can eat a little. When I'm not touched my skin
feels like the flip side of a magnet.


The Alien penetrated me very slowly as we sat together on the bed.
(This is Ulrike Meinhof speaking to the inhabitants of Earth ....As
the rope was tightening around my neck I lost perception but regained
all my consciousness and discernment. An Alien made love with me ...)
Uncovering his body takes my breath away. The paleness of it
underneath the soft dark hair. The Alien was naked. I had several of
my clothes on. We're very still. Fibrational quivers between our
bodies in the dark. "This's exactly how I imagined it would be. So
smooth." It now becomes possible to say anything. Low voice. "Don't
move." "I like to hear your breathing."


Like me, the Alien is anorexic. Sometimes we talk about our
malabsorption problems. Everything turns to shit. Food's
uncontrollable. If only it were possible to circumvent the throat, the
stomach and the small intestine and digest food just by seeing. After
several weeks the Alien decides that he will no longer make love to me
because I'm "not the One." Aliens spend their lifetimes on this
planet testing, searching. They get dewy-eyed, nostalgic about
hometown virgins.


I'm in my kitchen making chicken noodle soup for the Alien. It's his
fifth day of withdrawal from valium and heroin. He can't walk, can't
sleep. I want so much for him to eat. Even though he says he doesn't
love me, I can't believe it's true. Therefore, I want to help him.
"How about a nice piece of wholewheat toast?" I ask, ladling out his
soup. "Don't take offense by this," he says, "but there's
something I have to tell you. Your cunt smells bad. If you washed the
way you should, I would've done the things to you I do to all my
other girlfriends." I gasp. Soup spills. "Sorry," he says. "I
guess I should've mentioned it when we were dating."


Food stripped of all its color, nutrients and smells and then
reconstituted, like my expensive hair (he loves it), Ravissant Salon,
$300, like suburban small town cunts drenched in Massengil.


If I could only eat, a little ---


Although no one, to my knowledge, has analyzed the work of Frederich
Nietzsche through the occurrence of his blinding headaches, the poet
Kenneth Rexroth reads Simone Weil's philosophy through her anorexia.
Both are "egregious nonsense ... unholy folly." Rexroth puts lays
the blame where it belongs; on the Catholic men, Gustave Thibon and
Father Perrin, who took her seriously. "If only," Rexroth speculated
in **The Nation** (1957), "she had sought out an unsophisticated
parish priest, who would have told her 'Come, come, my child, what
you need is to get baptized, obey the Ten Commandments, forget about
religion, put some meat on your bones and get a husband' ..."


What you need is a good fuck, he said to me.


In **Holy Anorexia**, the scholar Rudolph Bell wants to take the
magnificence of the medieval female saints and drag them down to his
own level. He does this by conflating them with contemporary teenage
girls, who he finds pathetic and ridiculous. St. Catherine, St.
Theresa, and Hildegaard van Bingham are all essentially the same;
they're solipsistic brats. The collective trans-historic She, the
holy anorexic, "emerges from a frightened insecure psychic world to
become a champion of spiritual perfection .... Her will is to do
God's will, and she alone claims to know God's will." The holy
anorexic is a manipulative vixen; she "commands the war against her
body and therefore suffers deeply at every defeat, whether it is a
plate of food she gobbles down or a disturbing flagellation by nude
devils and wild beasts. Then with varying degrees of success, the holy
radical"---like the newly slender teenage girl---"begins to feel
victorious ..."


Like witches, or female writers, thinkers, artists, who use the names
of others when chronicling their lived experience, holy anorexics are
not merely people to be differed with; they must be despised.


Shouldn't it be possible to leave the body? Is it wrong to even try?
Hungry yet repelled by food, Weil wrote: "Our greatest affliction is
that looking and eating are two different operations. Eternal
beatitude is a state where to look is to eat."


"The Alien is in my eyes. He's flooding my eyes. He's completely
penetrating me, every bit of me in my eyes.


He's in my eyes, he's spreading into my brain. Oh God,


he's in my mind. He's making me feel things in my body that I don't
feel. He's making me feel feelings, sexual


feelings. And he's there. He's everywhere. My body's changing."


David Jacobs, 1988 interview with an Alien Abductee


- from **Aliens & Anorexia**, Semiotexte/Smart Art Press 1999

---

In **Aliens & Anorexia** I am attempting to make contact with the
writer and philosopher Simone Weil. At the moment of her death in
August, 1943, Weil became an Alien, i.e., a legend who transformed
politics into tragic poetry. Not all Alien encounters are hostile and
dispassionate invasions. There are others who see the Aliens as their
friends. Aliens encounters, like narrative, happen essentially in
realtime. In order to make contact with the Aliens, it is necessary to
carve out little pieces of yourself to let the Aliens come in.


In Paris, the librarian Florence de Lussy is editing Weil's
**Collected Works** for Gallimard. Weil's been dead for more than
fifty years. The project's overdue. The edition will contain eleven
volumes, and yet hardly any of what Weil wrote was published in her
own lifetime. Because she was an amateur philosopher, teaching
philosophy in French girls' lycees until 1941 when Jews were banned
from working for the government, Weil's writing has a narrative
quality mostly absent from the philosophy of her own time. She wrote
articles for the leftist press, reports, position papers and
communiques during her years as a trade union activist. Concurrently,
and in the years following her disillusion with the trade union
movement, she wrote notebooks and voluminous letters to her friends
and colleagues. In solidarity with the dispossession of the workers
who her labor colleagues claimed to represent, Weil sought out the
experience of dispossession in the person that she knew the best,
herself. "If the 'I' is the only thing we truly own, we must
destroy it," she wrote in **Gravity and Grace**. "Use the 'I' to
break down 'I'." She was despicable; according to Bataille,
"odious, immoral ... a dirty hook-nosed Jew." Had anyone taken her
seriously enough to prompt her to write professionally for
publication, her work would not have happened. She was writing to find
out what she thought.


"The body is a lever for salvation," Weil wrote in her notebook in
New York. "But in what way? What is the right way to use it?"


Simone Weil was a performative philosopher. Because her texts are
really notebook writings, there isn't ever any subject that's apart
from her. Which is not to say she's writing "memoir" or
"autobiography." Channeling her subjects through her person, Weil
does what writers do. She is constructing a narrative in
realtime---arriving at a state of openness, witnessed by her audience,
the reader---in which thoughts fly in and out according to who's
listening. In Weil's philosophy, just like in narrative or phone sex,
it's not the story that we're really hearing, it is the fact and act
of telling it. Her thought approaches narrative---an emotional
transparency that occurs when someone else is listening to you.



# Rachel Levitsky: On Narrativity



## A. Alphabets 

WHY? Because I love to quote myself. Because I have a
fantasy of saying it all. Because of the dense foundation. Because it
is that difficult to imagine it's a girl. Because, I want to write a
beautiful sentence. (Violet Leduc) Because, A fine rain was filling
him with hope and despair. (ibid) Because there is so much to explain
when you are not, say, Stanley Kubrick, like why the back of the naked
torso (female) is relevant to the subject matter. Because I should
have written of the degradation of an aging pussy before Richard Hell
did. Because the world needs to be created and stated over and over
again if one is a woman. Because some of my favorite women writers
feel they must write as men because it is impossible for them to write
action as a woman. (See Christina Peri Rossi; Iris Murdoch told a
college class in which sat Marcella Durand, that writing as a man was
easier.) Because I am afraid a penis will be placed in my absences
when what I need is a dildo, in other words I need plastic, rubber,
elasticity, strength, reliability, trust, safety. In other words to my
dismay, my absences, my blanks, my ambiguities are most comfortable to
men, meaning, they will define them, but it is women that I want.

## B. Bully 

Because I'm a poet I will tell you this is about narrativity
and I hope you will believe me. Because it is narrative and I am a
poet I expect you to believe me. I got together with Judy the Pothead
DumDum. She didn't ask me about my writing or say that I looked good.
Trashy but good. She didn't say it, so I am saying it. I wasn't
drawing a cat, dog, house. I was scribbling. I didn't make sense to
you or to myself. I was being messy which was a clear expression. I
want you to notice me but don't expect you to. I didn't wear
underpants and it wasn't a bad dream. My shirt is both dirty and
stained, just what you'd like to accuse me of. My lips taste good and
my pits stink. You like the smell of my hair but its just Vidal
Sassoon, bought cheap at the five and dime, no, that'd be Rite Aid,
everything that is anything these days is everywhere. I am practically
nowhere. I am trying to remember to stay off the drugs most times I
forget why. My ends are splitting and I can't afford the expensive
haircuts and don't trust the lady at the five and dime. My hairs true
color reforms from the root. You'd prefer to be fooled. Call me cat,
dog, house frau in a light blue frock. I can do it for a moment and my
thin lips rock and roll in almost any shade, though the counter boy'd
have me believe one works better than another. I haven't got a date
or room on my card for dinner. Martinis are expensive. I make them at
home like Laura Dern's mother in Wild at Heart. I take other women's
misfortune as a warning. She's a wizened cat so waits, knowing Ill
move first and fall on my reputedly pretty face. I made the point that
the pronouns don't matter but watch how they do, in vitro, embryo,
room with a view. All dogs are as faithful as me. I've a new middle
name, its hard to be ethical. Watch the one who emits so much, so much
love, s/he will betray you most stunningly or most poorly. Jade
Netanya looks up from the middle of the photo, grief stricken, the
dead guy wielding the eight-inch hammer divinely inscribed with the
ineffable name of god was her fiance, though she's a lesbian. The
rabbi, the unbalanced baal shuva, Jade, my sister, fellow poets. She
was waiting for Ms. Perfection/Beatific Amor but No One likes to be
alone. Its like being diabetic which uninterceded leads to blindness
and amputations. Nowadays in more adults and poor fat children. He was
a menace to the children. The complaining neighbors came to feel
guilty as Jews will, they didn't invite him over enough to dinner.
Instead, they made a lovely funeral. About me. As a child I was often
having others take off their pants and squat. Expunge or include? A?
or P?

## C. Cut me ups 

I think it's Nicole Brossard who said, surely among
others, that in poetry the character is always far away, whereas in
prose there are characters more alive than herself. Let me look for
it, aha, here it is, page 27, in "She Would Be The First Sentence of
My Novel." The characters, they will talk and argue among themselves,
they will disintegrate and reappear, they will separate and unite.
They will explain, as Yaya and Grace do constantly, how it is that
they both care to be lovely and don't give a damn about happiness or
what you think of them, how they understand that the monstrous is the
more potent state, and embrace it, but politically and for survival,
they must cover it up constantly. Grace, who primps like a lady, is as
disturbing as Yaya, who emits the foulness of hell on earth, when she
(Grace) walks into a room. The lookers on are confused by their own
discomfort. The obvious grotesque (Yaya) is easier to ignore. Men
claim ugliness for themselves, it is free, without cost, abandonment.
It is theirs, they own it, they saddle us with the cost of beauty. I
saw a woman who'd been freed from her cancerous chin, now an absence
covered by scarred and taut skin. Of course class, capitalism, if she
had been rich . . . The next day there was another, a s/he, a
distortion. I fell in love. And today, there was another, my cheating
heart. A beautiful creature in a convex mirror, reading **The
Adventures of Buffy the Vampire Slayer**. In my dreams I am another,
idealized, the one with whom I am in love. On the train, I am a
monster, I hold onto the hope that you will not turn away. I wait for
the novel in which I am not a ghost. The theory gave so much
hope---those French (what is it about the French?), the Lesbian Body
(bloody), De Beauvoir's the potent female finger on the button
(machine). Feminine plural, a sex that isn't one, alter egos, as
drag, Dred, Queer Confab, Bound. I began to believe I was beautiful on
the inside. Another woman became a mother. Another lesbian a wife. At
the Lesbian bar a screech, a piercing cry on the heals of a bitter
complaint. Forty pounds heavier, those horrifying saggy tits, from the
mouths of babes, the new lover of a good friend's ex-lover. Political
moment? Nowhere to be found. At the mall, at the Body Shop you may
send postcards to senators. I escape to Coney Island, as yet
mall-less. Here I can feel this---we are in the interim, the
momentless, bearing the interminable wait for the next moment. When
the next time comes, I will still be writing the Lesbian body, forty
pounds heavier, with sagging tits.

 

 



# Pamela Lu: my narrative



 

First there was this thing, this experience, that I felt myself having
at last. I had felt the experience coming on for some time, without
knowing quite what it was about to be, what it might resemble, or when
exactly it might arrive. Perhaps I had read about it once, glimpsed a
description of it catching a character, a familiar protagonist, a
stand-in, in its sure, capable hands. There was the possibility that
it might miss me entirely as I loped along the wrong side of the
alley, ordered the wrong label of scotch from the wrong west-end
saloon. A possibility that I might lift my eyes just in time to watch
it happen to my neighbor instead and, all too late, jump to my feet to
exclaim, "Hey, that's my horse! Well, maybe not my horse exactly,
but absolutely its blood relation!" To which the experience would
reply, tenderly and oh so Jamesian, "Not this time, not you. Maybe
next year, to the soul you will have become if only you had learned to
abandon the regret of your current, expiring ghost ..."

Then I was sure that it had happened, not merely to a surrogate, but
to me personally, that I had not only jumped into its hands but
entered it in total, inhabiting its limits with the whole of my being.
The unanswerable question of it flogged me with the rapture of body
and soul. I called myself into existence by my proper name, and
watched my former life flow past in parallel streams, burbling and
breaking up into little tearful books. I demanded unambiguous signs of
my entry into the actual world. And this all happened in the middle of
time, while I or some other writer was fast asleep, dreaming up
masterpieces that were bound to be forgotten. While I was too busy
becoming the character who would have become me in an ideal life,
friends carried on in my absence. I felt the need to track the
movements of my friends, to check in periodically and make sure no one
had died or disappeared. Usually they could all be accounted for,
milling about in packs around the pool table, as an unidentified
narrator slipped through their midst like a generous thief, strewing
stolen, anonymous pears left and right.

In the slow crush of time, characters aged, my friends grew older, and
the unthinkable happened to people. I did not, however, in the moment
in which I was destined to live, understand any of this. I had been
impressed by the nature of fate and outcome in E.M. Forster novels --
how, in the absence of divine intervention, the hand of fate was given
over to mortals who schemed compulsively, recklessly, and blindly to
bring about often unfortunate results, perhaps even a tragedy. There
were ambitious do-gooders whose ambitions caused more harm than good,
prejudiced Victorians who lashed out politely and brutally at the
weak, colonial subjects who pleased their masters by losing out again
and again. The characters lived; they brought life down upon
themselves; they wrestled with causality and causality won. Is that
why I'm always confusing causality with casualty?

A friend from school once observed that fiction students as a group
seemed bigger and physically stronger than their poet counterparts.
How much would this statement suggest a three-ring bout in the
writers' circle, with scrappy but effete sonneteers grappling at the
well-muscled backs of market scriveners? What kind of over-dense
poetic whimsy could tickle the plodding narrative to unclog its drain
to the real story? This story was so real it was almost untellable;
one would have had to be already dead, installed in some paradise or
afterlife, in order to understand it completely. The neutron star of
its as yet undiscovered language weighed the earth down in orbit,
while sending out regular pulsations of superhot, ecstatic light which
caused even fatalists to see. And yet the parameters of the story
demanded the most outrageous courage of those who would experience it:
biblionauts who would sail paper spaceships deep into the fiery
outskirts of existence and return, defenseless, with a strange,
material testimony. Was this, after all, the true knowledge and danger
that awaited our fumbling lives?

 



# Nicole Markotic: Narrotics: New Narrative and the Prose Poem





I am interested in a dialogue about "new" narrative, which is
perhaps not so much *new*, as newly theorized. Many prose writers do
not consider themselves fiction writers, yet at the same time are not
really part of on-going poetics discussions which, for the most part,
do not focus on narrative. Although I also write prose fiction, I
consider my prose poetry and other alternative, interdisciplinary, and
innovative sentences to be a neoteric prose that both challenges and
expands language boundaries.

For me, the prose poem is a poetic strategy embedded within the
structure of narrative, and a feminist response to patriarchal
language and forms. By embracing both prose syntax and poetic
disruptions, the prose poem defies conventional linear grammar and
refuses to satisfy my desires for either poetry or story. My desire is
for so much more than causal, linear, rational and persuasive
normative sentences. In my novel and in my poetry, I try to live
between the promise of narrative and the fulfillment of the habit of
fiction.

By expropriating two distinct genres while presenting a form of
writing that is seen to consist of both, prose poetry presents itself
as hybrid writing; a hybrid that I explore as crossing between the
desire to exceed formal considerations, and the narrational insistence
surrounding such considerations. In my prose poems, I try to embrace
the problematic of poetry that "looks" like ordinary prose
narrative, yet invites disjunctive readings which may extend beyond
traditional poetic forms and conventional conceptions of narrative. My
pieces "fail" as poetry--yet continually celebrate the erotic
contradiction such failure narrates.

The prose poem, for me, offers itself as a "genre" that permits and
encourages me to move freely from sentence to line-break to full-stop
to repetition. Without entirely settling on its own definition, the
prose poem rattles my airtight nerves, upsets my crabapple go karts,
insistently and lasciviously rubs my discourse the wrong
way---inventing, always reinventing itself. Its very possibility
denies its own existence. For me, the prose poem remains liminal: not
merely transgressive, but indeterminite, caught in the phoenix act of
disappearing, reappearing as its own *possibility*.

My interest in this form begins at the level of the sentence. What
makes a sentence a line of poetry rather than an excerpt from an essay
or novel? The answer, for me, is the surrounding words and sentences,
the position of those words on the page, the complicated ache of the
forced return at the end of each "line." Ear and eye games, the
playing of interruption and proceed. Not stop-and-go, but
go-and-go-farther. As soon as I take a step towards the horizon, the
horizon reconfigures---itself and me.

What interests me about the sentence as poetic form is that poets who
are *least* interested in representational language are most often the
ones who turn to a grammatical structure which invests heavily in
sentential logic. The use and abuse of the sentence, then, seems to be
the focus of the poem. And because one sentence follows the
next--which offers a visual hypotasis but a semiotic parataxis---the
poem insists on a reading that is far more linear (for lack of a
better word), than is a line-break poem with disparate images stacked
one above the other. The one poetic device designated as prose or
*not* poetry, the sentence, becomes the choice unit of composition for
poets who intrigue me, shock me, paratactically get under my skin.

Within each sentential piece can emerge a plasticity resistant to
notions of purity in either prose *or* poetry. Gertrude Stein chose
the sentence as her basic unit of composition. Her sentences release
readers from the semantic baggage traditionally loaded into narrative
prose as they re-define, distort, conflate, skew, and otherwise render
the sentence pliable and visceral:

> A kind in glass and a cousin, a spectacle
> and nothing strange in a single hurt color and an
> arrangement in a system to pointing. All this and
> not ordinary, not unordered in not resembling. The
> difference is spreading. (**Tender Buttons** 9)

Such prose rumbles inside the belly of poetry, or perhaps poetry
shifts awkwardly within the abdomen of prose. Readers, seduced by
sentence structure, discover themselves trespassing an erotics of
prose, transgressing away from familiar and known fiction offerings.

Writers engaging in what Stephen Fredman calls "poets prose,"
struggle to create new ideas from *inside* the conventions that
constitute the either/or structure of the prose poem. This structure
is the chance for prose writers to both follow narrative and to
deviate away from story. For example, Robert Kroetsch, in his poem
"The Sad Phoenician," pursues an elusive and/but dialogue that
generates a bifurcated and pending narrative:

|  and        the Phoenicians gave us the whole works
|  but        what does that matter to a world that ignores
|               them, the Greeks got all the credit of
|               course, because they stole the alphabet
|  and        the girl from Swift Current, she more or less
|               took everything
|  but        the kitchen sink, claiming all my books, my
|               my records, my prints; she moved in with that
|               photographer from Saskatoon, the one who
|               takes those sterling pictures of the wind
|  and        I should sue
|  but        she follows large flocks of birds, I hear,
|               calling my name
|  and        pleading
|  but        why she developed a thing for adverbs, that's
|               too rich for my blood, I want to tell you
|  and

Readers wander through an and/but tug-of-war that is also a narrative
wandering, from the Phoenicians and Greeks to Saskatchewan, to the
very grammar of the telling. It is this *telling* that gets so many
new prose writers into trouble---isnt plot the very basis of novels?
How can one tell a story and avoid fiction? And why do we want to?

Feminist writers must resist and reinvent patriarchal language to make
it our own. We cross a border every time we pick up a pen or turn on
the computer or hum into a tape deck. The border is a visible line on
the page that the prose poem physically outlines. For many women, this
is not simply a gendered border, but one that has been criss-crossed
by social lines such as race or class. Harryette Mullen, in her prose
poetry book, **S*PeRM**K*T**, investigates the connective links
between the social and the linguistic:

| Eat junk, don't shoot. Fast food leaves hunger off the hook.
| Employees must wash
| hands. Bleach your needles, cook the works. Stick it to the frying
| pan, hyped again.
| Another teflon prez. Caught in the fire around midnight, quick and
| dirty biz. Smoked
| in the self-cleaning oven.

Mullen's disconnected sentences can be read to produce meanings that
address subjects ranging from drugs to poverty in contemporary USA.
But the structure of the "narrative" does not create fictional
characters and circumstances to battle these issues; rather, Mullen's
words entice at the same time as they startle reading practices. Word
association and colloquial speech patterns reinvent the chance to
re-enter the text from another crack. This text does not close the
book on the story, it continues to remind that reading is a
socially-coded act, and that a reader's subjectivity is constructed
through how she enters language.

Language enters me, and my sentences struggle against what I know to
be "just" a sentence. I hesitate in doorways and on fences, I plan
my route along edges and cracks in the sidewalk, I pencil in margins
made up of words only words, and then I cross over into blank space.
Not because it is "new" or "white" or "virginal" or any other
dominant appropriative term, but because the blank space is where the
prose poem offers a *visible* margin, a territory (known or not) that
hangs onto the edges of writing, clings to the edges of edges. I get
edgy when I try to read or write a prose poem, anxious, excitable,
downright perplexed. I hang about on the inside of this perplexing
form because it keeps me on my language toes: unsure and insecure,
tip-toeing across whatever lines a poem insists upon.

I "plot" at sentences and subterfuge, dream of a poetry that
withstands ragged-right fashions, yet continues to address narrative
within disjunctive non-lineated prose. I look to the prose poem as
mutation-- by definition unstable, punctuated by eternally reproducing
desires.

I want to carry words to where theyre already going, but not
necessarily to where I think they're carrying me. I strive to enact
an and/but *narrative erotic* that is neither fiction nor poetry, that
invites readers to see beyond seeing and write beyond reading. I veer
away from the end of that prose line, from the punct signifying the
closing ceremony, the final page next to the cover, the certain and
the certified. I question the metaphorical imperative that insists
toes are what we tip on, and grasp instead the reassurance of
instability, embrace the inability to embrace a stable subjectivity,
and echo cheerfully what Kathleen Fraser describes as "fragments of a
wholeness only guessed at" (**Each Next**). My prose poems
want/desire/lust after such guessing contortions.





# Ashok Mathur: The Narrative Site: narrative as preliminary investigation


TEXT MISSING


# Laura Moriarty: *from* Nude Memoir



## 9

Ten minus one

She counted but was

not believed. The syllables like a mantra. The answer. Counting in
order to rid herself of numbers, of time. The increments of the
present. The same count. A decimal minus one reminds one never to go
over or to go back. Not a sequence but a repetition like a song. A
petition like a question. Never again. Duchamp as a form of grief. A
diary. A display of the invisible. Of visible decay. The mode here is
eliminative. It is the only mouth she has left.

"Piece of Ass Lost." The necropolis pictured by a dead poet in
Ellroy's **Clandestine**. Poet cop. The mouthpiece of fate.
Exploitation as love. Women who don't get older. Women as men. It
doesn't matter. The U.S. number one in violent death just past Mexico
and Brazil. First in the First World and the Third. The guardian of
the infested spirit. Someone follows a woman. She is not a muse but a
fate. She talks too much.. They drink together.They eat. Is she one of
many or a singular masterpiece. Impossible to follow him down that
street. The action is complete to the degree that it is not legible.
Or transferable to another medium. It is not unfinished but undone.
Not the crime but the gun. The piece of string with which you hope to
find yourself. Missing. She was missing her head. What we have is a
reconstruction.

Diana watches herself on TV. She wanders absently around the house.
She is not dead. She is an artist. The interview reveals everything
she hopes for. There is a queen and a corpse. She finds her cigarettes
and begins to smoke. She is seventy. Voluptuous as parchment. Thickly
written. She takes into herself a sense of death. She lets it out.

She wonders how to preserve access without giving into a deadened
sense of hierarchical exclusion. Now that authority has been shown to
be the shuck it is. To provide a method for reading, to alter the
activity of reading itself. In retrospect or in the sense that it had
already taken place. She read the scene before the crime. Or we
wouldn't be having this conversation. His ambition is naked,
mechanical. He also wants to read.

The vaginal scroll

She performs (Schneeman)

Memorably laid out

Source or origin

Like a physical note

Of itself sufficient

Opened like the book

She wrote

The reconstruction is sloppy. Bad. Not convincing. Not made to be so.
Black velvet lines the unseen back of the door. To soften the blow.
Her character pokes through her performance like bones through flesh.
Judy. Judith. She loves him but he loves her double. Her twin. Who is
convincing. A con, snare or fox. A pest. He likes the angularity. The
bending back. But he falls during the kiss. He is injured. "I hate
this" she says. He doesn't miss her then.

The scroll unwinding and the performer

Takes over removing

Her shroud her look

Distracted in the picture

She takes off

Her glasses her theatricality

Will be attacked in place of her person

He argues her down

Her desire is unknown

Impossible to predict its hold on him. "... a diagram of the cruel
geometries of desire." The reviews are ambivalent. The scriptedness
of their exchanges are painful to him. Her double jumps into the bay.
The actor after. Also his double. Later on a sound stage wet
close-ups. The real actors. His strained face dazed with obsession.
The paleness of her hair, dark dress spread out but clinging also. Her
limpness in his arms. He stares down at her, climbing imaginary steps
out of the sea. Her high heels in silhouette. The twist of her waist
is displayed to him, to us.

## 1

Madeleine is weak but alive. Unconscious. He takes her to his
apartment on Russian Hill. He kicks open the bedroom door, placing her
carefully on his bed. He first takes off her shoes. She stirs but
doesn't wake. He holds her in a sitting position, unzipping her dress
in the back. Pale wide shoulders, wet slip, brassier. He pulls her
dress and slip over her head. He becomes aware that her breasts are
against him. Nipples like buttons. He works quickly against her
waking. Unfastens garters. Peels off stockings. He reaches around her
waist and has some trouble with clips. He begins to breathe hard but
quietly. Her head falls back. Her neck is long and white. His hands
are dark against her skin. He is careful with his hands like a
surgeon. He draws the blanket over her. Even in this drowned sleep
there is a defensiveness to the set of her features. He stares only
briefly. His audience, himself, is aware of the contrivance of his
composure. But is unaware that her unconsciousness is an act. He knows
only in retrospect. Perhaps she knows that he is both protector and
killer. She seems to be in control. Also looking back. But she is out
of her depth.

The Bride does not refuse

this stripping by the

bachelors, even

accepts it since she

furnishes the love gasoline

and goes so far as to help

towards complete nudity

by developing in a

sparkling fashion

Her intense desire for orgasm clings to her like his red silk robe.
When she runs she knows he will go where she goes. She has tricked him
but at too great a cost. She sees this as a job. He sees it as rescue
and sex. But she can't be saved from the danger of being false. She
can't be had. The hopelessness skews their perception. Heightens
their senses.

The artist likes to see the woman go too far. The woman likes it too.
She manages the twists with some virtuosity. She puts herself beyond
her skill. The character changes in desperation but is unable, each
time, to survive. Her eyes in multiple shots. His eye in the credits.
Jimmie. A simple expedient but effective. Death to itself. And Kim.
The actor is left.

To be disassembled

Exit stage right

And another rescue

Marooned on a penal colony in space

She remembers his memory

His voice a slurred machine

"My nakedness creates you," he says (dead)

She brings up the interface

Turns it on

A golem. Like herself. Skin like flesh only not in her mind. Inside
the memory, the wetware an obscene cream as if robots ran on semen.
She turns to him. In pieces. In a kind of mechanical pain. He carries
in him the mothers who didn't survive. It is evident in his soft
address. He is her confidant. Her history. She confides. They confer
in a jacked-in version of love. His love is wired in. They know things
together that otherwise only she knows. "It's better than sex," she
says. He says " No, it's not."

Kienholz by definition

The bionic man

"We can rebuild him"

Not a faceless door

But organ donor

Plugged in

What happened to him

If she is Death in Orphee

He is her driver

An assisted death. They would be lovers in another life. She prefers
his later more vicious fiction but he hasn't grown into it yet. Their
times are not synced.


| He in fact                             She assisted
| Was scattered                          It was speaking
|                     Not belief
| She longed for                         The expert
| She was                                Not love


 

 



# Lisa Robertson: For Soft Architects



 

Lucite

(a didactic)

(because the present is not articulate)

Sit us on Lucite gently and we will tell you how knowledge came to us.

First the dull mud softened resulting in putrefaction, lust and

intelligence, pearl globs, jeweled stuff like ferrets, little theatres
of

mica, a purse containing all the evil smells of daily life. Then just
the

one vowel, iterate and buttressed and expiring; leaning, embracing,
gazing.

It devised with our claw identity for the sake of food. Selves, it
says,

feeding us, I adore you, you know. Like a boy blowing from a tree, we

decided, we were paid, we were free. We incessantly prepared for the

future. On the title page, two angels blowing on the trumpets of fame
held

up a globe decorated with three fleur-de-lys and topped with a crown.
We

learned habits and tricks; we faked happiness and relief. We were a
single

grin with lips pasted back. We said we saw Europes of hallucination,
fatty

broths sprinkled with deer, stenciled eagles, serpents and lurid rags.
That

was a format of saying, a frayed ligature. We were fading into the
presence

or absence of food, of sleep, of doubt.

Enough of the least. Doubt wants no space. Sincerity takes too long in
an

aggressive emergency. The present is not articulate. Also we feel a
sense

of duality. We wear out the art. We start to modify our vocables--
flick,

pour, dribble estrangement's sex. Since it is we who are one, and we
who

are scattered. We're this pair or more that can't absorb one another
in a

meaning effect. We feel palpitated by daylight and its deliberate
plants. A

description makes us. Among all these ejaculations and judgements we
feel

its elsewhere sculpt our body.

We would be walking down the street in the poetrycity. Gauze would be

everywhere. The day would be big, halting, gracious, revocable, cheap.
We'd

be the she-dandies in incredibly voluptuous jackets ribboning back
from our

waists, totally lined in pink pure silk, also in pure humming, and
we'd be

heading through the buildings with knowledge---that is, ephemeral

knowledge, like leafage or sleeves or pigment. The streets are salons
that

receive abundantly our description. The soft buildings are charming.
And

our manners are software. We feel sartorial joy. We'd be at the river

watching the fat water lap the blonde built part, loving temporal

improprieties, the bright trash floating in slow liberation. We'd be

applying our make-up at noon by the river, leaning on the balustrade,

thinking about a little shun, a little fight, a little sofa. We'd be

thinking about hinges. We'd feel for our pen. Something might seduce
us. A

likeness. Samesame pouring through it.

Knowledge comes to us.

 

 



# Camille Roy: Monstrous



 

One of the forms of narrative I write is software. Its lucrative.
About four years ago I used stock options to buy a house right around
the corner plus one block from one of the worst housing projects in
San Francisco. A couple thousand people live there. It gives my
neighborhood the highest child hunger rate in the city. Our first
night in the house someone got murdered, just before midnight . It was
a block a way but the shot sounded like it was in our back yard. One
shot, a pause, then another. Purposeful. Somehow I knew it was
intended to kill, and not just a couple of kids shooting at the moon.
Plus the neighbor told us hed had his car stolen 3 times.

Impenetrable poverty plus dumb fuck rules, class and race segregation:
Id moved into the only San Francisco neighborhood that duplicated on a
smaller scale what I grew up with. It annoyed me.

Locality, forever. *Skewed*. Something huge gets mutilated as it
slides through a stuffy tube. Were on the beach very far to the west,
watching what pops out. It contains all of American culture. I came
here so tightly wound. Born on 43rd street south side Chicago & havent
been back since I left the hospital.

From my dining room window, at the rear of the house, the project
looks strangely vacant. There just never seem to be many people
around. The buildings proceed down the hill towards the old industrial
port like giant shabby steps, but there is never anyone on the racks
of balconies. Ive rarely driven through it. Structurally, its sort of
a dead-end place, the way its laid out, like a suburban subdivision:
streets point into it, then twist up like spaghetti. The few
drive-through streets are dotted with dealers scoping out the passing
cars. Im just talking about the roads.

When I first moved in I often found myself dreamily staring out the
dining room window. I wanted to check out one of those balconies. The
view would be amazing, they practically hang over the bay. Developers
have been salivating over that piece of land for years. Nowadaze they
are nibbling at the edges of the project, building expensive live work
lofts for software designers on adjoining vacant industrial land. Its
weird. Different economic classes get spliced together via crimes. The
mode of interaction being criminal. So one day I mentioned to a friend
of mine that I didnt get it, how did dealers get kids to work for
them---playing courier, or delivery boy. What would a dealer have on a
kid? Why get involved with some jacked-up, scary asshole? I felt like
an idiot as soon as the words left my mouth. Patiently, step by step,
my friend explained how it was done, until I could have done it
myself, as obviously he had. All I had to do was ask. Knowledge. The
getting & taking and the tearing up. Did I want to go there?

Of course I did. One day I walked in, took a place on the balcony next
to all of my friends & drank their salty water. I listened to the
radio. I watched as a crack lady ran down the street behind a white
dog. Then the dog was scratching at the door. When I woke up that
sound was the shade, bumping against the window frame. And I was
thinking, as I am always doing and my thinking told me this: *This is
what I want. Its inside my system of attractions. Im penetrated by the
present and its always the same: chronic anger. Awful but refreshing*.

From up here, it is all visible. From down below, also. Radiant
contradiction. Eyeballs: the severely vivid mechanism. Finally what is
seen is not a target but just circumference, expanding. Highlights
scatter across the field.

I walked into the projects a couple of weeks ago. Its right around the
corner, why not just walk? It was a friends birthday. She told me
where she lived, but it wasnt easy to find. The apartments didnt have
numbers on them, you had to just know. I asked a bunch of people. Kids
were running everywhere. How come I hadnt seen them from my back
window? I look whiter than usual, I thought, looking at my hand. Up
here and not even shopping, that made me odd. People looked at me
skeptically. I felt skeptical about myself, but slick, as in greased.
I wanted to fall off my little ledge. Bored with what had gotten
dished up as myself. The backwash of swallowing it. That nausea.

The balcony was great. I hung with my friends and listened to the
radio. They played that song I like, the one about money. Later we
went out to eat birthday steaks.

California is shallow. Thats true. Though it thrills me that I can
walk across the city without getting beat up for crossing some
invisible dividing line of racial turf. Of course I could get beat up
for something else. *Im so easy to please.* Its the instability at the
heart which is to say the heartlessness of just washing away faster.

Im supposed to write about narrativity but these problems of locality
are where I get started. For me writing grinds itself into whats
familiar yet unbearable. Add mobility to that and, voila, narrative.
Disjunction is the formal consequence of this ripping and tearing, and
its packed with information, almost to the point of being insensible.

The streets I walk measure me. They measure you too, through
mechanisms both criminal and friendly. Including that knowledge is a
kind of spectacular innocence---the moment of saturation feels
dazzling, but there is probably no point. Still I love it, formally
and erotically and intimately. Its all about nested structures. I
entrust my twisted little pieces to the warm nest of the sick social
body, and I feel our bond. It nourishes me.

To theorize my point of view, to pursue critical formalism as a ritual
and as a grasp for power, let me put it this way. Narrative provides
context so that the rupturing of identity is recognizable. I think we
are impossible beings. We ruthlessly evade scrutiny, yet recognition
is the beginning of transformative emotion. Its a feeding process. You
dont know if youre creating a monster.

As a narrative writer I improvise recognition. Its like a location
from which mutant beings emerge. This feels true, in life they never
stop emerging. Look---they even swarm through this text. I allow it
because Im terrified and seduced. To encounter them via narrative is
to formalize a moment of surrender.

(An earlier version of this piece was presented at the Portable Talk
Series, SUNY Buffalo.)



# Leslie Scalapino: Narrating



I just write, without advance plan as to a plot or form the writing
driven by a wind of my being in some urgency at the time. Each work
I've done has been written in that way. Each is different. The next
time I'll write dependent on what's occurring then. Here I'll say
something about Defoe (Sun & Moon, 1995) since of my prose it was the
hardest on me (in a state of extremity) and required the greatest
extension. 'Narrating' is for me:

Inextricably related not simply because events 'are related', but
because the relation intrinsically is oneself. The phenomenal world of
nature is inseparable from one's 'conception' (visual and tactile)
and also does not come from oneself. One is one's relation to the
rose disc-cloud on the desert as to social occurrence, such as
people's minute nuances or war:

"disc floating on the desert, with cattle that come to the edge of
the blue water and the white desert not coming from it.

One has to agree with them or is not there which in society can not
push out from themselves the red soft hanging disc. that is separate.

misery in having to be in agreement with them giving up being there
though one can't do that."

One can not be as social definition, yet that exists. That social
relation is inherent conflict as oneself in which one cannot exist or
be 'causes' the syntax to be a 'place'. Surfaces collapse on each
other, existing together as plates in paragraphs, clarity only
possible by inclusion of, or being, the conflict. Conflict is the
writing's shape configured and is attention in space.

Sleeping dreams are 'compared' to the literal "day"-as-surface as
if both day and dreams were surfaces as thin discs and placed
side-by-side the ego not in either of these but there also:

"One sees oneself as simply a shallow behavior that is thin. and so
one is free. And then turned inside so that one's dreams are sent
into one from the day, as they are it. So there is no REM. People rest
in the thin area. One laughs frisky. love in behavior is there, in
reverse. That is the street, the way it is seen."

Also fictional events and real events (the Gulf War) are placed
side-by-side regardless of their size:

"An object connotes by a prior connection or culture.

Where the object loses, or begins, its connotative existence is to be
just then non-connotative. (To see its edge...) would place the piece
at the point of dissolving. forming as an object and socially. which
is nothing. An object's form isn't anything as that. So it's the
point of the form and the conceptual meaning separating. (or rather,
being the same)...Trying to get to or to see where actions separate
from their social existence which is what they are that is their
connotative being, so seeing an action without that."

Action is seen 'without' itself in the sense that action (that which
is enacted, as physical movement) is 'other than' writing, the one
can not be the other they (both) are also phenomena as conflict, thin
discs that impinge on each other:

"Action collapses on itself and is compressed, in that it is
description of itself. It is thus in the present-time, still and calm.

It does not diverge from itself, supposedly. That's a conception
which people already know. Therefore speaking enables one to see the
diverging or separation that is this present. These actions occur as
if to make the pupil of an eye (some other's) dilate, and be held
open. The present takes place as 'some other.'

Life is dilated.

It does not diverge because description cannot be separate. as it is
of itself."

Defoe, the writer, created fictional characters who were supposedly
real giving documentary accounts. They were to be imagined as
entities, which had no reality. Paragraphs are plates of actions which
are not single and do not begin or end there in order for there to be
reflection (as the text) throughout everywhere that is not mirroring
of authority as authority is not (is not in) any single one of those
actions:

"To name it will be merely caught again in their authority as they
will recognize that as themselves and will be in their trap again.

If there is no area between his dreams and waking life, there is no
identifying with anyone.

Walk through stream of hot metal bumpers of cars that then move like
plates shifting. Mass of plates and she's veering in it. On tin tail
of motorbike of yellow teeth thrashing in neck. He's ahead then. On
it again thrashing neck. The bike skidding and swaying in narrow
channel amidst bumpers. It bucks forward. Neck bike veering and
bucking out on the vast tin sheet. the sunlight is reflecting off. He
wriggles free, lunging. The motorbike lunges forward. Crashes into
car's side in the mass. Slippery blood on his head neck slashing.
She's slashed hard slamming into car's side. Rider on foot then,
veering and is way ahead then out on stalled mass.

Seeing him out on the vast reflected expanse."

Prior sight we see things before they occur: whatever dream occurs,
that's waking life. Perception does occur in people (or 'in'
something happening) what is it?

"Perception occurs before the context it is not in a setting.

Without seeing it as it was going on while seeing it, really. The man
in being authority is the process of down fawning on the feet of the
other man while this is merely an image a negative that is imposed on
it. Like an angel.

Is it that seeing into the future as what's going to happen to people
it then just is that. It occurs. Isn't deflected. That isn't
continual change which is aware as we are in it.

We can see it in ourselves. that's why it's aware.

People see that later. Not when they're young. it's separate from
what's actually there which is to be seen directly. has to be.

There is no 'inner reality' to the destruction that this person is
creating for themselves from within, which is seen from the outside by
others.

So suffering is in oneself, and has no 'inner reality'."

The relation of creating a spatial shape as the writing to changing
what occurs (a friend dying from leukemia was having a bone marrow
transplant at the same time as the bombing of Iraq the illusion that
one could avert and change this reality while it's occurring in the
mind relation that's the writing yet the friend died and the bombing
destroyed) is an impossible terrain/conflict. The illusion itself took
one apart. It's an illusion that is bathos, like jump-starting a car.
There is nothing commensurate. Fictional jump-starts:

Real boys (and others) starving in the Sudanese desert. One is in or
has the dreams of one's fictional characters to make a particular
surface. "There is no resemblance between the boys and the boys in
the desert, that's forward in time supposedly. really, as it has
reality in itself and is separate from this. One non-reality against
others in oneself, it is seen between them. as oneself is simply that.

It isn't changed when it gets to this. Or by it later.

Dreams are excluded from this, which occur. That's convenient because
I can't remember them. dreamed one which met this red (actual) sunset
that just occurred.

This isn't it. Flattened to my inherent nature. I just woke up. The
man who was the driver deserted by the boys who don't resemble them
on the desert, has a dream:

Venus was hanging above the red smear, which I didn't see in it. The
neighbors with whom had formerly been at war for many years agreed to
smuggle oil to them.

It doesn't resemble them and can be reproduced and only seen in
reading as lovely isn't the market. Seen as lovely it therefore
isn't the market."

In writing: "The seeing is the event, rather than arising from its
occurrence." And: "People's experience lags behind the time
they're in." In other words, Defoe is trying to find the relation
between seeing (apprehension) and occurrence (events occur
'outside'). There is a relation one makes:

"Make writing that forms before motions.

As when I was in a rage, it formed first I'd forgotten it so the
anger occurred, I was in misery. Walking was at base and therefore
observation occurs.

Not observation occurring about it after.

Fictions are so simple that no observation occurs after.

So the fiction occurs first.

Defoe occurs first and so has no validity. It's not bathos and is
only distorted to be first or as being that.

So there's no Garden of Eden. There's not authority at all, that's
to be at base.

Walking occurs first and observation is not derived from it.

I want to still observation first. I started to walk one time with no
writhing and didn't remember beginning walking. I had nothing to
writhe about. There isn't a start of that, that's separated from
walking.

One can eliminate power in oneself by not eliciting placating. Memory
of what hasn't been seen before. So fiction (I mean all
conceptualizing) occurs where the real event isn't isn't seen, it's
eliminated, but is occurring or has. Openly doesn't resemble it.

There's present-time first. That's what fiction is, when it is
entirely stilled. It doesn't resemble the event."

Fictionalizing drives the mind-terrain into a state of separation.
There the dream abuts itself. A real event (such as here an anti-war
demonstration) also abuts itself only:

"The dream I had is closer to being because it abuts it then. before
it's occurred. This is in the present. The blossoms on the plum trees
opened. On some. Birds sit, and fly amongst branches of bare trees. It
has no reverse side, and is thin.

Birds skim low by me.

Wall of police swinging their clubs sweep forward. young punks with
tattoos emerge from the crowd, turning the cop car over and burning
it. They receive beatings.

...A memory as just a thin disc, as it is seen that way. There is no
event.

Warm, the birds stirring and flying. I had a memory of being on an
empty street in San Diego near-by the ocean; just that. that as a disc
because it became so stagnant it seemed it was going to collapse, and
be still. it flapped. my mind had become so tired its resistance was
going. The mind being weary as clarifying in itself.

... 'false joy' because they're lying to us. but inside it is not
their 'false joy.' It could be one's own, that is a thought. which
in itself is joy which bangs against it. The dark cattle stood earlier
with the disc of moon on the other side of them why they were dark;
when the sun was on the side (of them) on which they were dark.

That is in memory as the actual event.

The chest in one is struggling in constriction of joke. Trash. The air
cannot get into the rib cage. The thought of a bicyclist comes up
which is a memory and therefore separated from one, who is small. That
was him and so flattened shooting ahead. His back, that makes one
laugh constricted inside so that it's him.

So the flapping swans here so they're the same as the sky simply
flying is that (in time), before.

The entire day completely dilated is flapping in one's recesses so it
is behind in the back of one. Stagnant in that sense, as it's
flapping and then narrowing it in front though it's still the day.

It's the day in a sense, narrowed to a thin disc in front in which
the entire dilated day behind in the recesses of oneself bangs
shuttering on it. The day collapses in that sense when that's slowed
and interminable.

One rests.

One just sees from one's social group perspective say and then the
huge bright day is dilated flapping with that; so it's involuntarily
let go as it's large and while hitting the recesses in front of one
in the present, remains there shuttering."

Comic book style, the apprehension occurs via "the other" who has a
hole (or eye) in her side, everything seen alongside and flattened.
The visual slots or frames of the comic book (only conceptually
implied) can include all layers and perspectives at once, horizontal
and vertical. The Other is in love with James Dean who in death is
turned into a deer. She pursues the deer to rescue James Dean as the
black rain falls. She's traveling through refugees dying from blood
blisters on the roads. Her own blood blister is gently lanced by a
soldier who's driving the jeep.

The incommensurable relation between outside-action (in the world) and
interior-action mind phenomena is overtly the subject. The shape the
writing takes is related to use of fictional and
autobiographical/historical event (such as the bombing of Iraq) at the
time it's occurring. The time it's occurring the paragraph-plates
are real-time moment of exterior event brought into compressed
relation of interior occurrence/horizon together and always separated.
The intention is that fictional illusion be at the moment of real-time
to: implode it as real-time action.

These are illusions in the practical sense of being 'only' writing
(writing has no relation to present or historical reality it has no
reality, is it as well, being mind phenomena. So the 'ordinary'
small action is [to be] as much 'reality' as events that are
devastating). I am trying to divest hierarchy-of-actions.
'Hierarchy-of-actions' voids people's occurrences (that is,
individuals' actions are relegated to inconsequential or invisible).
Such hierarchy substitutes 'overview' of
'history'/interpretation/doctrine therefore to divest
'hierarchy-of-actions' is certainly a political act. (In
one's/reader's /viewer's conceptualization then [is the
intention]). What I'm referring to as 'divesting
hierarchy-of-actions' by definition has to be in oneself.

Making illusions and noticing them makes them so overt that they
'become' bathos. (I don't regard that as "alienation," however.)
Fundamentally anarchism (viewing that as being observation itself) is
necessitated. Besides **Defoe**, my other prose works (crossed with
being poetry) are: **The Return of Painting**, **The Pearl, and
Orion/A Trilogy** (reprinted by Talisman, 1997) and **The Front
Matter, Dead Souls** (Wesleyan, 1996). Also **Orchid Jetsam** (in
manuscript) and **R-hu** (forthcoming Atelos Press).

 



# Gail Scott: Bottoms Up




MONTREAL, QUEBEC: I return to the site of an old novel. This will
not always be a street of failure, even if still playing the former
glamour of the seedy. French-language covers of country music are
playing on the radio. Men (sit) alone at tables. One with haggard
bearded face. His lower jaw (is) toothless. Teeth in dreams = sex. The
low façades opposite parading peeling tin cornices. An air of
stagnation possibly verging on cliché. I take some verbs out; then put
them in again.

It is the hottest summer ever. Meteorologists are, with divine
hindsight, admitting global warming. To escape the heat, I go to a
dark afternoon theatre. Where a sassy high school troupes performing
Büchners **Wozeck**. The adolescents sweet songs juxtaposed on the
gloom and violence under, somehow dissolving earlier-decade
interpretations foregrounding worn-out existential despair. Crossing a
parking lot behind a smoked meat shop, I am thinking a story, to avoid
eternally returning (to keep it moving), might be structured thus: an
"older" woman writer circulates at a "fringe" theatre festival of
young artists. She has lost her love. Feels discombobulated. Nothing.
She skirts the crowd asking several 20-year-olds: anything good? She
will then string a humiliated (but raunchy) love tale together,
interlaying bits of youthful sweetness and anger, representing to her
in her present state of emptiness, a more contemporaneously rapid
conflation of beginnings and endings. A word about narrative:

At another table, a man shakes his purple-shirted shoulders in the hot
bar air. To "Caught With Your Pants Down." Drinking straight
tequila. The same table where X and I sat. Discussing why our favorite
writers of new and experimental fiction are not rich and famous. "Too
abject," we say. In a bag at our feet, some cheaply extravagant
dollhouse boudoir furniture purchased for her little son. From the
store with the saggy awning opposite. Leaving, we forget it. Outside
another man passing. With several teeth missing. Teeth = action. But
why the narrator (the woman) endlessly remarking. Such toothless
ghosts of subjects. Among dozens of better-furbished faces. Is her
"local" constructed out of some kind of distancing or bias?* Or
"mere" projection of loves losses? I am thinking **not** abject the
subject. Unless negatively framed. At point of crossing space of
(non)-reception between the work and the world. When site (interior)s
signed minor (inadequate). While exterior=dominant. Yet, intrinsic and
extrinsic syntax are not separate; rapidly they mate. Should I be
happy the lover having sex with no one. If having only virtual sex
with me? I take some verbs out. And put them in again. A word about
the waitress:

Dominatrix in clinging leopard-spotted polyester. Small breasts.
Ponytail. Fortyish. Saying (in québécois): UN verre de vin-maison ne
te ferait pas de mal, one glass of house wine will not ruin the
stomach. I.e. its terrible. For 75 cents more you can have a quarter
liter. Adding: you look en forme, terrific. WE tell each other--in
guise of complimenting--we haven't changed in years. I opting for
the smallest quantity of red vinegar. Now young woman passing by
window. Huge breasts encased in tight halter top. Some little cap over
short hair. And---upper incisors gone. Like the meteorologist, I
admitting only to coincidence of circumstances. Projecting accumulated
lack on unsuspecting bodies. (Waitress bringing unasked for
quarter-liter). Which bodies, in being thus sentenced, already frozen
in past gesture or alias. While environment drifting elsewhere. As in
that restless white river the lover (much later) wanting to attack
with kayak. Drifting eternally toward full-color horizons. The silver
flashes indicating minor notes of salmon struggling upstream. Sitting
close beside her, I encouragingly declaring such projection, battered
by tergiversation of context, likely best position. For
contemporaneous narrator. Just as lover putting hand under skirt cut
on the bias to flare out attractively at the bottom. And saying she
still wanting something with "us." A story is something---you can
put your teeth into:

But what might happen here? With (soon) a closed sign across the
window. Two blocks down. A polished glass and marble multi-story,
multi-venue, multi-media repertory theatre. Having replaced the
crushed blue façade of the smoky cozy café-cinéma where we used to see
old or experimental European French movies. Built by Québécois Soft
Image inventor Daniel Langlois. Were like that here: always
oscillating between the ultra-modern and the crumbling. The sound
systems so efficient, one feels, listening to the Buena Vista Social
Club, as if in some club in crumbling Havana. Though the octogenarian
musicians having mostly ceased performing on their blockaded island.
Because "nowhere" to go. Until American Ry Cooder choreographing
their (global) return. I am thinking of when Québec liberationists
claiming solidarity with Cuba. Which solidarity currently updated to
meaning "corporate opportunity." At last, the Cubans playing
Carnegie Hall. I am thinking how any narrative, if fronted, marketed
from economically preferential geographical site, avoiding being
troped as exotically remote, a remoteness that must (paradoxically)
scale global walls or languish. I am thinking of Cuban sunsets,
suffused towards evening with a little blood. Of the womans eye
growing humid, sentimental. When, in the movie, the elderly guitarist
exclaiming: "There is nothing like a night of love." To keep it
moving, I take some verbs out and put them in again. A word about
identity:

Now the waitress in her leopardskin is leaning over the purple shirt.
Whos reading a sexy mens magazine. Pausing, he pulls a huge
fluorescent flashlight still wrapped in hard plastic cover from a bag.
She points out (still speaking [naturellement], French): its no good
without batteries. Laughing. I can smell him. The conversation
segueing to European-French actress Catherine Deneuve. The waitress
declaring in drawn-out Québécois dipthongs the Europeans looking down
on, Deneuve "plate," boring: "Always the same tone." Outside a
friend passing by window. Looking for a date. Very strong shoulders.
Her long red hair streaming out behind. I know she has latex gloves in
her bag. Walking naturally, she "vogues." Causing her to get thrown
out of womens washrooms. For being "wrong" gender. I am thinking how
certain minor or unusual demeanors, if flaunted, getting read
extrinsically as unappealing or threatening. (In Canada, "Québécois"
often = flamboyant or risqué; coincidentally, same thing for
"queer"). This can be devastating. Or interesting. Friend passing
again, very feminine in wrap-around skirt, curly red hair. Yet walking
as if faking it. I am thinking how narrator (other). IF not knowing
how friend herself-self-perceiving, able to create a relationship with
reader permitting permutation of both obvious and unspeakable. The
body being capable of gestures contrary to understanding. I am
thinking about narrator as double. About evening out subject/object
weight at each end of sentence. A word about affect:

[It has never occurred to me to be a poet. The poet, with rare
dazzling exceptions, even when "absent," looms imbricated. In her
total façade of language. While reader happily at play. In her in
sandbox of spaces. Lacking spontaneity, I am drawn to the violence of
animation. Experienced by a subject. Drifting towards object. Across
the placement of the verb. Which nakedness, exposure, seeming somehow
progressive, egalitarian. Yet failing to make woman (narrator) cease
obsession with beginnings (causes) and endings (conclusions). So
trauma still risking terminating in single unbearable seduction scene.
I am thinking of certain literary feminists. Who using devices copped
from poetry. To construct porous or unbounded subject. Capable of
merging "more" ecologically with context. I am thinking of the gap
of the unspeakable. There may be no animal boundaryjust the stream and
the pleasure that lies in it, teasing the poet.** I am thinking
about the portentousness of sentencing. Alternately (defensively?), I
am thinking that a sentence in a community of sentences (paragraphs)
somehow leaving impression of consciously reaching out to other(s).
Notwithstanding characteristic narrative flick of head back over
shoulder. At point of the period. For purpose of getting . . .
bearings. This I finding . . . touching. A word about the geography of
the bar]:

Many empty tables. Two beefs in dark corner. Chairs fading outward.
Towards sunwashed waitress, purple shirt and harsh light of street.
Waitress, flashlight and me. A sign above our heads: "Les crevettes
de MATANE arrivées!!! [Fraîches.]{.underline} MATANE shrimp in!!!!
Fresh. The drawn-out Québécois fraîîîches savorously feminine and
plural. The waitress and purple shirt still complaining Deneuve
lacking edge. Offering as replacement, Québécoise country music star.
Recently coming out with "fabulous CD." Though "star" still having
to work nightly in bars. "Very tough. If youre pregnant." Outside,
young nomad in artfully torn outfit and $50-dollar-haircut. Asking
for change in anglicized French. They come here from the suburbs. Not
to feel guilty. In this huge dark room with stuffed animals on walls,
I am thinking of simulation in a diminshing French-speaking city,
where everyone considering themselves minority; yet in some way also
faking it. I am thinking of consequence for narrative, so often
straining toward "natural" on site where continental popular culture
in perpetual transmigration from Germanic to Latinate. Of Mickey
Mouse, Patsy Klein, Sylvester Stone, moving lips in English. While
saying something else entirely. I am thinking of living on a
Renaissance Ponte Vecchio: less bridge between than Babel of
echoes.** Whose interpretation requiring, precisely, resistance to
meaning. I am thinking of narration as introjection. Many friends have
dentures. A word about hybridity.

Two blocks up. Little stages. Blue-and-white fleur-de-lys flags for
the fête nationale. The Argentinean tango I missed. Somehow having
erased Québec "patron" Saint Jean Baptistes bleeding and miserable
little lamb. Featured in earlier decades national feast-day
celebrations.* Fête progressing north. Group doing samba. Québécois
folk songs. Block production of Molière farce. Free good food.
Everyone speaking French "with accent." Whole family dragging
mahogany dining table out on sidewalk. Now eating supper. Later, I,
sleepless, listening to thunderclaps on John Cage piece. To compensate
for dryness. Leopardskin waitress offering another glass of vinegar.
Muscled guy in tight sleeveless t-shirt and gleaming chain with cross.
I am thinking of narrative as opaque barrier. There is no limit
between life and deathly fascination. Viva Che! on wall. Now I must go
before another cigarette. Buy food. Take messages. If any. The disease
is not under control. Police car outside.

 

## Bottom Notes

This piece is dedicated to Carla Harryman.

It is in dialogue with other writers and other texts, including the
writing of, and conversations with, Dianne Chisholm, Robert Glück
(notably re: the narrator as bottom), Carla Harryman, Camille Roy, and
Sarah Schulman.

** Textual references are to Barrett Wattens **Total Syntax**, a
cover citation from **Sight** by Lyn Hejinian and Leslie Scalapino,
and Sherry Simons essay "The Ponte Vecchio and the Comma of
Translation."

Saint Jean Baptiste Day, June 24, is a national feast day in Québec.

 

# Juliana Spahr: Narrative



| The water is blackish, green, and dark.
| It gathers from its
| separated state, gathers from rain, gathers into stream.
| It gathers in the mountain.
| It gathers then travels, collects to become brackish.
| Water travels, falls over a cliff, is falling.
| Water is falling.
| Falling onto rocks.
| Because water falls it is.
| Because water streams it is.
| Because water collects into a pool it is narrative.
| The pool is cold.
| The pool is sheltered from sun by a cliff.
| The pool is filled with rocks.
| Water gathers over rocks, on rocks.
| Moss gathers over rocks, on rocks.
| Three arrive at this scene.
| This scene where water is cold.
| Where rocks are mossy.
| When the three enter the pool their feet slip on rocks that are
| mossy.
| As they slip, they slip deeper into water.
| Slip on mossy coldness.
| Slip into water so cold it makes their chest close.
| Slip deeply in.
| Water gathers them, gathers them by their slipping.
| Water covers them.
| Because water is brackish it is narrative.
| Because water is brackish they don't open their mouths.
| Because water is brackish they are closed in their immersion.
| They do immerse.
| But they don't open as they swim to falling water.
| They stand beneath falling water.
| Water beats down on them.
| Beats on their shoulders.
| Beats on their heads. Beats on them.
| They stand beneath water that is a roar of a falling.
| They stand in roar, in narrative.
| But water is brackish.
| So they do not kiss.
| Do not open their mouth beneath the waterfall.
| They let brackish water fall over them.
| Over their heads.
| Over their lips.
| Over their eyes.
| Over their ears.
| Over their hands which they hold up to feel the roar landing into
| their palms.
| Down their body.
| Brackish water.
| Closed bodies.
| Water gathers them to this place, this narrative place.
| Water covers them and they are covered with brackish water.
| They do immerse.
| They don't open.
| Immersion seals them off.
| There is no open mouth.
| No opening.
| No exchanging.
| Because it is brackish it is narrative falling over them.
| It falls over.
| It falls over them.
| Sealed yet together.
| They have come together with brackish.
| They have let brackish wash over then even if they don't let it
| inside.
| Because water falls it is narrative.
| Because they are immersed it is narrative.
| Because they love each other while separated it is narrative.
| Because the rocks are slippery with green moss it is narrative.
| Because they slip on the rocks it is narrative.
| Because they slip deeper into water.
| Because they allow the slip, are prepared for the slip and love its
| immersion it is narrative. Because it involves love it is narrative.
| Because it leaves them alone it is narrative.



# Anne Stone: Why write narrative when you could be the next guest on the Jerry Springer show!



I met someone whose tattoo had been sliced out of his arm, leaving a
jagged scar in place of the name of city he was born. I understood the
urge, to inject a place under your skin, only to have it removed like
a second stomach or a wart. Lately, I've been thinking a lot about
place. If you ask me where Im from, I can answer in a lot of different
ways, none of which would tell the whole story, or even manufacture
the kind of sense I would want to live with. I could show you the scar
on my leg and point to an intersection, or trace the scar angling up
from the first phalange on my index finger, pointing out the parking
lot where the Streetsville liquor store used to be. I could tell you
about strip malls, or stock yards, or franchised donut shops that
remind me of Dresden the morning after, draw you a map of the
territory in the fine sprinkling of ash collecting on a Formica
counter. I could tell you about the derelict cornfields that used to
be where that donut shop is now, or the first place I lived in
St.-Henri, show you the abandoned granary that burned to the ground
seven years ago and has since been replaced by industrial trailers. Or
maybe the building I lived in itself, which is sealed off now. I might
point out the remains of a much older structure, a series of
barn-board sheds. I would go to one of those sheds each afternoon to
write. The pick-up-sticks anatomy of that place inspired local kids
into acts of arson. I dont know if it was my own narrative tendencies
or the steady supply of thirteen year olds with zippos, but it was the
first part of the building they chose to tear down.

I should tell you, before we go any further, that the scar is really
on my pointer finger. You should know this story is not particularly
reliable and, as a friend told me once while I was staring absently at
a menu, the map is not the territory.

Somehow, during the months I spent in that shed, writing what would
become **jacks: a gothic gospel**, the smell of the packing plant my
father took me to as a girl infiltrated the barn-boards. The plant was
on his delivery route, and I used to stop off at the stock yards to
pet the shit-stained flanks of cows as they were herded into
slaughter. St-Henri reeks of my childhood and the Streetsville liquor
store is as organized as a months supply of birth control pills, the
bins of national and international wines formatted on the principle of
a 28-day dial, the kind that comes complete with seven sugary pills to
remind you of the color red. When I think of all the places that have
come to dereliction, I understand myself in terms of the word
tenacious. I know it is only my thinking that makes it so. I dont know
if they hand out birth control pills to fourteen year olds anymore,
the kind that remind me of a flattened representation of a monthly
agenda or a rolodex with a daily regimen of business cards. I do know
that the smell of those stockyard cows do not belong in this essay.
Nor does the way they kill cows in the Eastern Townships, which is
much more and much less personal.

I also think its important to tell you, before I go any further, that
I am not a vegetarian.

On my friends farm, the breeders have names like Sophia or, out of
earshot, are called after her daughters-in-law. The cows she will
slaughter and wrap herself are named after beige-toned bureaucratic
dociers. When I first met the woman who owns this farm, I asked about
the cows and was given the names of the breeders and the bull, the
others implied by a slurred ellipsis or existing as the space-off to
her story. I persisted, asking about one of the cows shed passed over.
"T-2306? Or do you mean that one?" she asked, pointing to Sophia,
"theyre sisters." A little later that day, she promised to save that
cows thigh-bone for my dog.

The cows exist in terms of place. The cows of the stockyard and the
cows of the townships farm are the same breed, indistinguishable,
except for their deformation in terms of place. Even their smells are
different. Sophia and T-2306 are twin sisters, born on the same day,
from the same uterus.

If I were to write about T-2306, I would want something of that
tension to come through. The format of the place infiltrating
something which might be appalled identity. Or perhaps by identity I
mean body-as-place. If I were a photographer, I might take a
long-exposure photograph, the kind that effaces her body if it implies
movement, if her body-as-place shifts in relation to geographical
setting. The immobile objects and landscape would exist in the picture
as perfect solids. It would be an unremarkable photo, except for the
way you could see right through the cow to everything behind it.
Except for the way the picture would be taken as daylight gave way to
dark, and something of that lumen would gather the hide together into
the appearance of a bruise.

The length of exposure is an interesting way for me to begin to think
about length in narrative. As I am given to understand the technique,
if you lengthen the time that the shutter is open, the camera slowly
tucks whatever light there is into an objects surfaces. Ive seen night
photos taken with a long exposure, the light isnt reflected off the
surfaces of an object so much as collected there, staining the fabric.
The light appears to be a dirty liquid, seething up from under. The
implications fascinate me, the way that pulling sight long can deform
what is there, or ways of seeing it.

Thankfully, I am not bound to a single snapshot, because I want to
examine (and re-examine), lit (et relire), bed (and embed), these
surfaces, under-pinning the impoverished look of St-Henri, for
instance, with the reek of a west-end Toronto slaughter house, twenty
years distant in time, and 600 kilometers away. I want the space-off
of the shed I started writing **jacks** in to be that terrifying
plant. God: What is that? What is it? The dingy white towers next to
the stockyards are organized vertically, even though, as everybody
knows, cows are organized horizontally---they are grazers, right? So,
between the slaughterhouse and the packing plant some terrible
deformation of what it means to be a cow occurs, the axis of cowness
undergoes a grotesque skew. How do you even fit the word "cow" in a
building that tall? What could a building with elevators possibly have
to do with a cow? When I was a girl, I wasnt afraid of the men with
electrical prods, or the smell of shit and death. But I was terrified
by those vertical towers. I knew they embodied a cold and impersonal
force. If I called out to the men prodding the cows, for instance, I
could get them to talk to me, stop what they were doing for a while. I
doubted my presence could effect a pause when it came to anything in
or about those buildings. It wasnt so much that I didnt exist, as it
was that in their terms, I could not possibly exist. I lacked the
relevance to insist my own axis likewise undergo some miraculous
Holstein shift from x to y. The plant excluded all terms but those
present in its formula. If I had Goëdal for a companion on those walks
through the slaughterhouse, they might have made another kind of
sense. As it is, the memory refuses my attempts at sense-making, and
continues to fascinate me twenty years later. The shed I came to
narrative in has been torn down, and the vertical granary -- the one
that existed at the place where Beaudoin stutters to a stop at rue
St-Ambroise, the one that once implied the axial-shift undergone by a
field of wheat -- burned to the ground one winter night as I watched.
These places have a grammar that I am only now beginning to grapple
with (or make-up).

I should probably confess that Ive apprehended a similar syntax in
unfamiliar restaurants. Once, a maitre-D unfolded my body like a table
cloth, the surface tension flattening and lengthening my body to the
skin of water, it delineated a lumen that precisely. Sensing some
terrifying grammar, I found that the only punctuation legible to me
were the round bottoms of oven-warmed plates pressing into my back
like a series of medieval cups. The kind 17th century doctors heat
with candles before placing in rows on either side of the spine,
creating a series of tiny vacuums to draw the suspected impurity up
from under. I find restaurants inscrutable. I mean, who would think to
spell the word "spent" on a plate in a diagonal line of cutlery? But
god, the relief to discover there was a silent means to signal an
impending departure.

What happens in the meantime? As your liminal-linen body hosts a
series of plates? And yes, physically, the body is a place that can,
with some effort, be occupied by one's self, or by others.

I am not at a restaurant. If I close my eyes, I lose my boundaries,
the air is tepid against my skin, no rough frisson strokes this
surface. I am not sensitive enough to maintain a secure sense of where
I end and something other begins. That requires a lepers perpetual
gaze to the extremities. If I were to close my eyes and begin typing
by rote, you would have to remind me: Where are my arms just now? my
fingers...

I am only sure of the tips. As they pad against the keys. One of my
fingers describes an unstable arch. Ive pulled a tendon with this
incessant tapping. It must be a very tiny tendon, the kind of thing
you might extract from the haunch of a bisected frog. Eyes closed, I
am the stoop of shoulders, the curve of a sore finger, and a series of
insensitive pads Ive developed as a result of my obsessive
predilection for narrative -- long narrative.

This is where I am today, and not at a restaurant packing plant. I am
at the place the scar on my index finger describes, an intersection
between place and the body. Writing narrative affords me a lateral way
in which to think about the body, about place, about the body in
place, about the body as place. In **Hush**, written very much like
those long-exposures I talked of earlier, the women exist in terms of
place---a narrative focus that, on the surface, would deny movement.
But writing against the vertical axis, implying it, even as I choose
to write on the horizontal plane, I can let a particular image accrete
to itself all sorts of other resonances---not just in the way a
particular image occurs in relation to her-body, Roses body, Loralies
body, but how it recurs, in relation to other events or objects or the
place itself.

Plot is a term that I hear twice, I hear the English plot and the
français plotte, or cunt---so it is a gendering of narrative. I am not
about plot. But am about this other form of plotting in narrative. Of
telling a story that unfolds at the level of language, where the words
I use recur over the length of the narrative. The repetition becomes
skewed, and what it touches, likewise becomes communicable. It isnt
mood, or even sensibility Im aiming at, though thats what descriptive
words are employed for a lot of the time. No, what is here is as
convoluted as the vaginal tract of a snail, and though yes, snails
plottes are bundled relatively small, they do possess immense surfaces
to play on.

I should admit Ive forgotten the word for a word that is descriptive.

Where am I going next? I want you to imagine a picture taken with a
very long exposure. No. I want you to imagine you think of the phrase
"glory-hole" every time you hear the word exposure, and then I want
you to imagine a picture taken with a very long exposure. A picture
taken on a night at the circus. The temporal trace of the antics of
acrobats and Dahlmer-clowns rendered in fly-wheels of color. Are you
sufficiently distracted? Good. Because until a moment ago I was
holding a Polaroid in my hand. It was a very old picture, or else,
someone has gone to a lot of trouble to make it look that way. The
edges are black from fingering. If I was going to show you the
picture, evidently, I changed my mind, because while you were looking
at the circus-shot, I slipped the picture into my pocket and lit a
cigarette.

I think you should know that I am familiar with the practical
applications of luting agents.

# Michelle Tea: Explain



 

I get asked sometimes to defend the way I write. To explain how it's
um writing I guess. Because I'm not making stuff up so why do I think
that anyone wants to hear about my crappy life. Well then don't read
it, punk! It's all I can think about, my own life and your life too.
I mean, what's everybody doing? I really want to know.

What if fiction writers had to answer dumb questions like that. Like,
What makes you think we believe this crap? How the hell do you know
what that geisha was thinking, white boy? Or, What are you afraid of?
Are you trying to hide something? Who are you, where can I find you
skulking about in these pages?

Oh I don't want to divide and conquer the writers. I like fiction, I
just read **Jesus Saves** by Darcey Steinke and it nearly put me in a
coma. My stomach hurt so bad I had to put it down, rest it on the dash
of a van that was rumbling through woodsy mountain landscape, manly
land, hunting land, in a state famous for serial killers, and in the
pages of this made-up story a little girl is tied up captured and
doomed and I know it's true, I mean, these things happen. I read Jenn
Banbury, **Like A Hole in the Head**, and it made me want to fuck up
on some spectacular way, as opposed to my normal, low-key fuck ups.
Those stories were really good.

But I just think it is so exciting that life can be so meaningful,
that you can smear it on a page and it's really important. It's as
much of a story as any fiction, but it's a document too. It happened,
so it's history. I'm reading **The Unsinkable Bambi Lake**, it's
before me on the table right now beside a rack of blueberry muffins
and a pile of bills that can't seem to pay themselves. When I read
Bambi's book I get to hear all about how cool my city, San Francisco,
was in the 70s. All the stuff I missed, victorians stuffed with
glamorous and dramatic G.A. queens, glitter and dustbunnies in the
corner, Bambi backstage in Berlin giving Bowie shit for selling out
way before that Dancing in the Streets fiasco. Dangerous boys and
hustlers, getting on estrogen, really just living a life, her own.
This question about 'memoirs', I think: are they asking about form
or structure, or really, am I being asked if my life, if Bambi's life
and Eileen Myles' life, and Cookie Mueller's life, are they asking
if our lives matter? I think they are.

I'm lucky because I get to be friends with some of my favorite
writers. I sat with Eileen Myles at a coffee shop on Valencia and she
told me that Charles Bukowski gave her permission to write. He just
claimed it, his terrain. The horseraces and the bars, the night, the
lamp that lit up his lousy hotel. Why not him. A poet. Why not Eileen.
I read her book, **Chelsea Girls**, and it all clicked. "Bread and
Water," what is she doing in that story but being poor. Scrounging for
money, tallying debts to friends, having her period, drinking and not
drinking. It's a genius story and the whole book is full of them,
electric. I was zapped. Why not me. My poverty and the girls that
don't love me and how drunk I got the other night. How I was a
prostitute. It seems to be literature when guys write about it, its
practically become a genre, men writing about their transcendental
trips to the cathouse, their orgasms and revelations. Or men writing
about women's lives in general. Straight people writing about queers
and white people writing about every other race on the planet. The
writing that I love, it's the Other telling the part that got left
out, the truth. Not only a writer and a historian, but a spy. There's
this awful copy shop near my house, I go there all the time because
I'm too lazy to walk up to Kinko's. The guys at this place are such
jerks. I had a bunch of my books and he said, Are Those Your Books?
Yeah. You wrote them? Yeah. He makes this suspicious little
scrunched-up face. Are You Sure? he asks. He means it. Looking at my
dirty fucked up hair and tattoos scrawled up my arms and whatever else
he saw. You Just Don't Look Like You Would Be A Writer. Yeah well
keep an eye out for yourself in my next novel, asshole.

I'm at work and I get a phone call and it's this girl. It's 2:30 in
the afternoon and she just woke up. I can hear birds chirping in the
background like she's in some fabulous jungle and I imagine light
slanting through fat glossy leaves and her all rumpled from sleep in a
slippery slip that sticks to her bones. Do You Have A Bird, I asked. I
Do. What Kind? A Cockatiel. I wonder what its name is but don't ask
because I want to keep it wild the way she is. She got arrested by the
cops for tagging Freedom Is Dying in a phone booth, they hauled her
off to jail. I feel this teeny obsession with her forming, and it
feels a lot like needing to write. A sort of zinging that grips you
from the inside. There's a place for her in my life right now and so
I need to write her down. The other night we were both high in that
club that's so red, a deep low red that made everything red, my dress
and torn fishnets, her shiny legs she kept twisting around, unfurling
like a mermaid. The red beer label curling on the bottle that she
begged off the bartender for free. I want to tell you all about her
fantastic strangeness, the sexy awkward way she walks like she's
going to wipe out, how she's paranoid, the excellent purity she sort
of radiates out from her eyes all black and smudgy, her dirty hair. I
could tell you about her jagged poems and drawings and the tattoos on
her fingers and the sad Johnny Thunders song on her answering machine.
I could tell you her whole story as I know it, and I want to, but
it's not mine to tell.

And then she calls me the next day kind of wiggy, says I Got Tripped
Out Thinking I Was Going To End Up In One Of Your Stories. All the
time someone gets mad at me or else I worry they will. Where does my
life stop, where does it slide into someone else's story and then
it's their job to tell it. My ex-girlfriend is going to kill me when
she finds out I wrote about that time she flipped out and was banging
her head against my bedroom wall and I had to kick her out and she
told me to fuck off. I mean, that's personal. And can I mention that
thing about her parents? It seems so crucial to understanding who she
is as a character. But she's not a character, she's a person. And
she had this affect on me. Can I talk about it? When I went to Ali's
house and she was cutting her arms and there was blood on her yellow
sheets and there was the razor, kind of crusty on her dresser. I said
Ali, I Feel Like That's Part Of The Story, Can I Write That? She
said, Tell The Truth, Michelle. But then, Ali's a writer too.

Sometimes, maybe even right now, I don't want to write. It seems so
boring. There are so many rules and I made them all myself: not here
in the house, in a cafe or a bar. You have to take a walk, and think
about it while your walking, try to go back there, feel all hurt or
fucked up and kind of lost, feel really in love, you were just with
the person, you smell like her, remember how you ate a burrito
afterwards, what it felt like to crave the steak. You have to drink
something while you write, either coffee or beer, or sangria. If
you're getting a late start and the sun is down already then it
should be a bar. You don't want the place closing up around you when
you're just hitting your stride, you're going to stay up late
immersed in all this life. Also you have to smoke continuously, so
pick a place that will let you do that. Maybe you should get on a
Greyhound and go somewhere else a place with romantic terrain where
you can be with your cigarettes. I think, maybe I should just be in a
band. Play some drums. Maybe I should take pictures, that's as true
as any story I've got to tell. But it's so expensive. Once I didn't
have any money, and I hardly knew anybody and I was so scared I'd
have to live out on the street. And I thought, it's ok I can still
write. Paper and pens are easy, they're cheap or easily stolen, you
could probably get people to give them to you. And if something really
bad like that ever happened, and whenever something does happen that
really sucks, it's hard, I think well ok I'll write about it. It's
so consoling and so redeeming. When I have a friend who doesn't write
and I see her having a hard time, like she's lonely or on too many
drugs or something fucked has happened I think oh I wish she could
write it. Write it all out. She could be an enormous angel. Probably
she is anyway, but then she could see it all lit up on the page,
swimming there, shining back up at her, good lighting for the movie
that is her life. She could write the soundtrack. She could bask in
herself, it's the greatest. Writing is the greatest, and writing the
truth in particular. Your little slice of it. You've got that, and
you've got your body, and I think that's it.

 





